Synopsis ~ The oleo-gum-resin of Opopanax is a ‘tear’ has no scent and can be handled like a fragile rock. There are confusing names associated with Opopanax that have to do with historical references but are clarified in the article by Jeanne Rose.

INTRODUCTION ~ Opopanax is another of the famous resins of the Orient; see also Myrrh and Olibanum (frankincense) on my blog https://jeanne-blog.com It is an Oleo-gum-resin, a term to describe oleo (oily or fatty in nature or look) gum (partly soluble in water) resin (partly or wholly soluble in alcohol). Therefore, an oleo-gum-resin has a nature that is partly soluble in water and alcohol and partly soluble in oil and looks oily. Consists mainly of oil, gum, and resin. It is liquid as it exudes and solidifies on contact with air and can be liquefied with alcohol. Examples are Myrrh, Frankincense, and Opopanax.

EO Profile & Naming •Latin Binomial/Botanical ~ Opopanax is an ancient tree resin and many species are called Opopanax including Commiphora erythraea var. glabrescens (C. opobalsamum). Species includes Commiphora erythraea, C.guidottii, C. kataf, C. glabrescens, C. holtiziana and C. pseudopaoli. Opopanax is closely related to Myrrh, they are in the same genus but different species. The common name of Opopanax is a source of confusion in pharmacognosy and books, since three different products bear this name. Thus, O. chironium (Apiaceae) is not to be confused with perfumery’s opopanax, a gum-resin obtained from Commiphora erythraea var. glabrescens of the family Burseraceae. Here it is most important that you know exactly what plant you want by Latin name and then common name and not the other way around.

Family ~Burseraceae. All members of this family are resinous. This species of the genus Commiphora are thorny bushes and small trees. We are not discussing the plants called opopanax from the Umbellifer (Apiaceae) family.

Endangered or Not ~ Some species of Opopanax are listed as critically endangered.

Countries of Origin ~ The Opopanax that I most carefully studied was from Eden Botanicals. The botanical name was Commiphora erythraea var. glabrescens (a synonym of Commiphora gorinii Chiov.) and the country of origin was Somalia and it was distilled in Morocco.

Naming & Etymology ~ Other Names are Bisabol Myrrh, Balm of Mecca. The term “Opopanax”, meaning “all healing juice”, is a source of confusion, since it is also used for the gum latex from several Umbellifer species, Ferula opopanax, also known as Opopanax chironium (Umbelliferae aka Apiaceae family), e.g. from Opopanax chironium (Pastinaca opopanax)(Umbelliferae). It is indigenous to the Mediterranean area. Know what you want.

There are over a 100 species of Commiphora which includes the species called Myrrh and Opopanax. There is much confusion for the consumer in this group of plants.

General description of plant, habitat & growth ~ OPOPANAX: A resin, Commiphora erythraea var. glabrescens (C. opobalsamum) family (Burseraceae) Bisabol Myrrh, Balm of Mecca. This is another of the famous resins of the Orient; see also Myrrh and Olibanum (frankincense).

Etymology: The term “Opopanax”, meaning “all healing juice”, (is a source of confusion, since this word is also used for the gum latex from several Umbellifer, see above in naming. All members of this family are resinous. The genus Commiphora are thorny bushes and small trees. They are important elements of the African dry-land vegetation.

Opopanax grows in Somalia (Africa’s Horn). It is a viscous exudate obtained by breaking the twigs. It solidifies to brown lumps of a warm-balsamic and sweet, honey-like fragrance. A resinoid is prepared by solvent extraction, and steam distillation of the resin gives an essential oil. They are both used in perfumes of the Oriental type. The main constituents of Opopanax oil are sesquiterpene hydrocarbons like alpha-santalene, alpha-bergamotene, and (Z)-alpha-bisabolene. According to Arctander, the olfactory difference between Myrrh oil and Opopanax oil is the vegetable-soup-like, slightly animalic-sweet odor of Opopanax oil compared with the medicinal-sharp freshness of Myrrh oil.

In Kenya, “Hagar is oily resin exudate from the stems of Commiphora holtziana. It oozes out and hardens to form lumps of various sizes and shapes with variable color from yellow to dark brown or black. Locally, Hagar is used as acaricide against ticks, snakebites, scorpions, foot rot, mange, and other livestock ailments. Commercially, it is a well-established herbal medicine, and used in essential oils and cosmetics.2”

Portion of plant used in distillation, how distilled, extraction methods & yield ~ The resin comes from the exudation from the bark. A resinoid is prepared from the resin by solvent extraction. Steam distillation of the resin gives the essential oil, which has a pleasant, warm, sweet, balsamic odor. Quality Opopanax has to be distilled from selected raw material and that requires knowledge of the plant. Much of this oil is ruined by poor distillation by inexperienced distillers who then sell their product. Opopanax oil and resinoid are used in perfumes with oriental style. An IFRA recommendation exists.

Yield ~ About 5 kilos of resin is required to yield one kilo of Opopanax essential oil.

Organoleptic Characteristics

Color: Pale Yellow Clarity: clear Viscosity: Non-viscous Taste: bitter Intensity of Odor: On a scale of 1-10, it is medium, about a 6-7.

Odor Description ~ Strongly spicy, vegetative, fruity and with a sharp spicy odor and somewhat animal-like undertone.

Solubility~ Opopanax is soluble in 10 volumes of 70% alcohol and some types are hazy in 10 volumes of 90% alcohol.

Chemical Components ~ A resinoid is prepared by solvent extraction, and steam distillation of the resin gives an essential oil. They are both used in perfumes of the Oriental type.

The main constituents of Opopanax oil are sesquiterpene hydrocarbons like alpha-santalene, alpha-bergamotene, and (Z)-alpha-bisabolene. According to Arctander, the olfactory difference between Myrrh oil and Opopanax oil is the vegetable-soup-like, slightly animalic-sweet odor of Opopanax oil compared with the medicinal-sharp freshness of myrrh.

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF OPOPANAX

Opopanax has been used in the past as an antispasmodic and when taken internally able to clear or open the natural ducts of the fluids and secretions of the body as an aperient.

Physical Uses & How used (AP) ~ Application ~ C. erythraea gums have been used for centuries in folk medicine for the treatment of cuts, bruises.

Extract of the gum of Commiphora erythraea Engler (Burseraceae), has larvicidal and repellent activity against the lone star tick, Amblyomma americanum (L.) and the American dog tick3

Emotional/Energetic Uses (AP or IN) ~ As with any of the resins they are often used by inhalation for calming and centering, to begin or end a ritual, or to modify another scent or in worship and purification.

DIFFUSE/DIFFUSION ~ Since Opopanax oil is from a resinous material it can be diffused by using a FanFuser on the scent disc but not from a glass enclosed diffuser — as the resin will clog the diffuser. The scent should be used as an accessory odor not the primary odor.

It is burned or inhaled in ritual for protection, for calming, for adding to another odor to make it more powerful, for cleansing and purification.

BLENDING &PERFUMERY ~ Its [Opopanax] power and ‘growth’ in a perfume is often underestimated; unless perfectly balanced with modifying and supporting materials, Opopanax oil has a tendency of ‘showing up’ in a rather unattractive manner after a short ageing period of the perfume. It blends well with “woody and heavy floral perfume bases, chypre, fougére-fern, leather and Oriental bases.”— Arctander.

“Used in perfumery industries, the essential oils prepared from the resins are well known. The essential oil of C. erythraea var. glabrescens, known as “opopanax”, is used in perfume of the Oriental type. The term “opopanax” is a source of confusion, since it is often used for the oil of different Commiphora genera, and for the gum latex oil of some Umbelliferae, for example Opopanax chironium.”1

As with other resins, Opopanax is used in perfumery as a fixative and for its quiet balsamic note and often used in the base note for exotic scents.

Opopanax blends well with Bergamot, Conifer needle oils, Coriander seed, fern scents, Labdanum, leather scents, Clary Sage and Patchouli.

HYDROSOL ~ I have not as yet ever experienced an Opopanax hydrosol.

PLEASE NOTE: A true hydrosol should be specifically distilled for the hydrosol, not as a co-product or even a by-product of essential oil distillation. The plant’s cellular water has many components most are lost under pressurized short steam runs for essential oil, and by using dried material. We recommend that the producers specifically distill for a product by using plant material that is fresh to extract as much cellular water of the plant as possible.

Key Use~ Mainly natural Botanical Perfumery

Historical Uses ~ The original Opopanax that is discussed historically is the Umbellifer type and this might have been used in embalming. It is erroneously thought that the Opopanax we use at this time from family Burseraceae had the same use — however, this is not true.

Interesting Facts ~ Some aspects of the Opopanax may be used in the flavoring industry.

Science article ~ Chemical Composition of the Essential Oil of Commiphora erythraea, 2009 • The essential oil composition of Commiphora erythraea (Ehrenb) Engl. is reported for the first time. The oil is rich in sesquiterpenes, particularly furanosesquiterpenes (50.3%). GC-MS analysis of the oil permitted differentiation between C. erythraea and C. kataf, two often confused species.

References:

1Marcotullio, Maria Carla * and etc. Chemical Composition of the Essential Oil of Commiphora erythraea. 2009

2Francis N. Gachathi, and Siri Eriksen. Gums and resins: The potential for supporting sustainable adaptation in Kenya’s drylands.

3An extract of Commiphora erythraea: a repellent and toxicant against ticks, J.F.Carroll , A.Maradufu , J.D. Warthen Jr., December 1989, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1570-7458.1989.tb01294

Arctander, Steffen. Perfume and Flavor Materials of NaturalOrigin. Elizabeth, NJ. 1960

Guenther, Ernest. The Essential Oils. Krieger Publ. Malabar, FL 1972

Langenheim, Jean H. Plant Resins. Timber Press, Portland.2003. This is the best book on the subject

Mabberley, D.J., Mabberley’s Plant Book, 2008 ThirdEdition with 2014 updates, Cambridge University Press

Rose, Jeanne. 375 Essential Oils and Hydrosols

Rose, Jeanne. The Aromatherapy Book

Use the essential oils in moderation.

Use the herb tea or resin when it is more appropriate.

Irritants: There is a moderate risk of skin sensitization, avoid use on hypersensitive, or damaged skin and on children less than 10 years of age; a maximum dermal use level of 0.6% is recommended. Dilute before using. Some of the gums and resins can be quite irritating or sensitizing. Use the Patch Test before applying.

Note: I would normally have underlined the word Opopanax so that wherever you see it you will be aware of which plant I am talking about. However, I was unable to do so with this blog post. I always try to capitalize the name of the herb or essential oil so that you will know I am speaking of the plant and not that particular color or taste.

Comments: I want to thank Eden Botanicals for their ongoing assistance to provide the new essential oils for these essential oil blog posts as well as their support to provide better information for the entire aromatherapy community.