The Geneva School is a classical Christian preparatory day school with a K4-12 student body. Rooted in the classical liberal arts traditions and taught from an evangelical Christian perspective.

In the Grammar stage (grades K through 6), when a child's brain is apt to memorize, students are taught the building blocks for future subjects. A child's ability to absorb information is capatalized on by singing, chanting, rhyming, storytelling, and other creative methods for learning math facts, history dates, grammar rules, and Latin vocabulary. Students enjoy experimental learning; dissect in science, perform in literature, and re-enact major events in history. These methods maximize learning and provide the building blocks for them to develop skill in problem solving, creative thinking, logical analysis and basic reasoning. The grammar school program offers substantial content through this unique, integrative approach to teaching.

In the Dialectic stage (grades 7 and 8), when a child would naturally become more argumentative, students learn formal logic. This provides them with a framework of sound reasoning with which to begin building arguments from their building blocks. They learn to organize their knowledge coherently while continuing to encounter new and exciting knowledge.

In the final stage, Rhetoric (grades 9-12), students learn through the Socratic method Classical Rhetoric as a way to polish their arguments and present them persuasively. The Rhetoric classes, grades 9-12, mission is to cultivate mastery of the written and spoken word; in philosophy, literature, languages, mathematics, or natural sciences. TGS seeks to encourage excellence in their college preparatory experience.

This unique model of education is what sets us apart from other preparatory schools. A student who graduates from The Geneva School will not simply be able to pass an AP exam or answer an essay question, but is able to articulate his or her opinions artfully and persuasively to any audience with the confidence that comes from having been taught to think, not just pass an exam.