The Geneva City School District (GCSD) serves approximately 2,200 students grades K through 12, as well as a Head Start program for children ages 3 and 4. The school boasts a range of clubs and extracurricular activities, interscholastic athletics (Section V) and fine arts opportunities, including a strong vocal music program. The high school's Advance Placement offerings encompass seven academic courses of study, as well as six Gemini courses which offer the opportunity to receive credit from Finger Lakes Community College. Graduates have gone on to attend some of the best two- and four-year institutions in the nation, as well as service academies and technical programs. Many of its broad base of talented and involved alumni remain in the Geneva community.

In its Best High Schools 2014 rankings, U.S. News and World Report cites Geneva as a silver medal winner. More than 19,400 schools in 50 states and the District of Columbia were examined, including the 1,149 high schools in New York. Geneva was ranked 114th in the state, 1,423rd in the nation.

Geneva 2020

In 2013, the City of Geneva joined with more than 100 community leaders, steering committee members and supporters in launching a new initiative, "Geneva 2020." This project harnesses the resources of the entire Geneva community - non-profit organizations, businesses and individuals- to advance Geneva's schools and build a stronger community. The program has already helped move the local high school graduation rate from 70% in 2010 to 82% in 2013, and to increase the number of local high school students entering college from 74% in 2009 to 76% in 2013.

Catholic Schools

In addition to the GCSD, Geneva is home to Saint Francis-Saint Stephen, a Catholic elementary school for children in grades Kindergarten through 8. St. Peter's Community Arts Academy provides music instruction to students of all ages with opportunities to perform throughout the year.

Higher Education

Geneva hosts three, very different institutions of higher education within its boundaries. Hobart and William Smith Colleges has called Geneva its home for nearly 200 years. The Cornell University College of Agriculture and Life Sciences New York State Agricultural Experiment Station (NYSAES) - now named Cornell AgriTech, Finger Lakes Health College of Nursing and Health Sciences and Finger Lakes Community College each have campuses in Geneva

This dynamic has provided the town with a high number of residents who hold Ph.D.s. They turn their expertise to locally-based research and give back to the region at-large through service on committees, boards and grassroots group.