The Geneva School celebrates her 30th anniversary this year. In May 1993, a book study inspired a small group to imagine what Christian classical education could look like here in Central Florida. After a summer of enthusiastic planning, The Geneva School was born.

From the beginning, Geneva’s mission has been to inspire students to love beauty, think deeply, and pursue Christ’s calling. Although we have grown from our humble beginnings, the mission remains the same, and our buildings and campus now match the quality of the transformative education that takes place each day at Geneva.

Geneva’s first permanent academic building, Ingram Hall, opened in August 2019. Named after Bob Ingram—founder, former board chairman, and longtime headmaster—and his wife, Marjean—founder, volunteer of countless hours, and longtime supporter of Geneva, it is where 7th–12th graders gather, learn, and grow.

The 53,000-square-foot lower school building opened in August 2022 for K4 through sixth graders. The building includes science labs; art rooms; music rooms; one enchanting library; a da Vinci room; a Kinder Corners Imagination room; tutoring rooms, classrooms, offices, workrooms, and meeting spaces; and concessions. The back porch dining area and playground are full of laughter, songs, and learning.

Named for John Riley, board chairman, and his wife, Laura, Geneva’s new competition gymnasium, Riley Arena, will host games, matches, and school-wide gatherings for generations. This space boasts four locker rooms with shower facilities, weight room, physical therapy room, multipurpose room, storage rooms, and athletic offices. An outdoor basketball court and a smaller practice field for lower school use complement the new gymnasium.

Geneva’s complete athletic complex includes a state-of-the-art track, soccer fields, baseball field, softball field, batting cages, tennis courts, and beach volleyball courts.

Gratitude is key at The Geneva School. From humble beginnings to the beautiful campus the community now enjoys, each moment shared adds to the story that is being written here. We look forward to many more chapters as we continue to inspire students to love beauty, think deeply, and pursue Christ’s calling.