Looking for self storage near Great Wyrley? easyStorage has you covered. easyStorage is an innovative storage company that aims to simplify self storage. Our goal is to create a stress-free and straightforward self storage experience for you. Our offering makes storage accessible nationwide, so British citizens everywhere can say “easyStorage brings storage space near me”.

With easyStorage, you do not have to step outside your home or office – we bring a self storage unit right to your doorstep. Our team loads your belongings into the storage van and transports them to the nearest self storage facility. When you want your storage items back, easyStorage delivers them to the desired location. The van and the fuel are on us – so you only pay for storage. easyStorage saves you time, effort, and costs for self storage in Great Wyrley.

Great Wyrley is a quaint village in the Cannock parish in Staffordshire. It includes the smaller locales of Landywood and Little Wyrley. The village was a rural settlement that turned into an industrial town. The Cannock Chase coalfield gave rise to the local trade of coal, ironstone, and metalworking. Over time, those industries shut down and Great Wyrley became a residential town.

Residents have plenty of housing options and neighbourhoods to choose from in Great Wyrley. Pretty cottages and townhouses line Brooklands Avenue and Lambourne Close. These streets have the added advantage of being close to Saint Mark's Church. Hall Lane and Moat Lane are near the prestigious Great Wyrley Academy and the Moat Hall Primary School and are popular with families. Jones Lane is another popular street close to the Great Wyrley Memorial Gardens.

Whether you are moving to Great Wyrley or looking for secure storage, easyStorage can fulfil your every removal and storage need. Our furniture storage options are perfect for anyone decluttering or downsizing to a smaller home. Our business storage plans work well for small businesses and large enterprises in Great Wyrley looking for cheap storage. easyStorage also offers flexible storage policies that allow customers to store items of any size.

Many residents choose to live in Great Wyrley for its easy pace of life and commute to larger towns for work. Gains Lane and Coppice Lane connect to the M6 and Watling Street junctions. This makes it easy to travel to nearby towns such as Lichfield, Wolverhampton, and Stafford. The Landywood railway station falls on the West Midlands line. It has connections to Birmingham, Coventry, and Rugeley Trent Valley. Bus routes also make it easy to reach nearby towns of Cheslyn Hay, Norton Canes, and Bloxwich.

For a small town, Great Wyrley has much to see and do. Shops, cafes, and pubs populate Station Road and High Street. Old favourites are the Royal Oak on Norton Lane and ​​The Star Inn on Walsall Road. The New Masons Bar & Grill and The Ivy House on Stafford Road in Newtown are some of the newer establishments.

There are numerous museums in and around Great Wyrley, such as the Walsall Leather Museum and Bantock House Museum. You can also soak up some culture at the Wolverhampton Art Gallery or learn about local history at the Lichfield Heritage Centre. The Wyrley & Essington Branch LNR is a great place to take in the countryside. The Shugborough Estate is steeped in time, complete with period exhibits and costumed staff.

Not in Great Wyrley, but find yourself searching for “self storage near me”? easyStorage offers self storage services in Mere Green, Penkridge, Codsall, and Perton. Reach out to easyStorage customer support with your questions, or head to the easyStorage website to make a booking today in Great Wyrley or nearby towns!