Manchester United have a new coach on their books after Ole Gunnar Solskjaer added Mark Dempsey to his set-up.

Here's everything you need to know about him...

Full name: Mark James Dempsey

Date of birth: 14 January 1964

Birthplace: Crumpsall, Manchester, UK

Dempsey came through the academy at United as a young player in the early 1980s. He was part of the senior set-up under former Old Trafford boss Ron Atkinson from 1982 but never made the grade and joined Sheffield United in 1986.

He also represented Swindon Town, Chesterfield, Rotherham United and Macclesfield Town during his playing career before returning to United in a development coaching role after retiring.

Dempsey left United in 2009 after more than 15 years with the club in order to take up another youth development coaching role with Norwegian outfit Tromso before linking up with Solskjaer at Molde a year later.

In 2014 Solskjaer took Dempsey to Cardiff with him but the pair's time in Wales didn't last long as United's interim boss was axed later that year.

Dempsey tried his hand at management with Norwegian clubs Haugesund, Start and Kongsvinger as well as Swedish outfit Djurgarden but the 54-year-old didn't last longer than seven months at any of the four clubs.

What's been said about Dempsey in the past?

Brian McClair in 2006: "Les Kershaw assembled a fantastic staff who work extremely well together. They believe totally in the philosophies of the club (United) and what we are trying to achieve in the academy.

"We have lost Rene Meulensteen to Brondby, where he has become their manager, but he left a very nice legacy. He tutored Mark Dempsey and Eamonn Malvey so they can continue the system."

Sir Alex Ferguson in 2008: "Les was followed by people like Jim Ryan, Brian McClair - who's now academy director - Dave Bushell, Mark Dempsey, Tony Whelan, Paul McGuinness.

"These guys have been here for over 15 years, so when I go I would presume all these lads would still be in place and working hard for United."