Centerville Map — Satellite Images of Centerville

original name: Centerville

geographical location: Wayne County, Indiana, United States, North America

geographical coordinates: 39° 49' 4" North, 84° 59' 47" West

detailed map of Centerville and near places

Welcome to the Centerville google satellite map! This place is situated in Wayne County, Indiana, United States, its geographical coordinates are 39° 49' 4" North, 84° 59' 47" West and its original name (with diacritics) is Centerville. See Centerville photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Centerville in United States. Centerville hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Centerville or add new placemark for Centerville.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Centerville hotel reservations

Book hotel in Centerville online and save money

Centerville hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in United States »

Centerville hotels – sortable list of all Centerville hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Centerville hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Centerville, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Centerville, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Centerville hotels map

The location of each Centerville hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Centerville hotel map is available where all hotels in Centerville are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Centerville hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Centerville hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Centerville hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Centerville hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Centerville

Super 8 Centerville Richmond (at 2407 North Centerville Road in Centerville)

Hampton Inn & Suites Richmond *** (in Richmond, distanced approximately 15 km)

Richmond Inn (in Richmond, distanced approximately 15 km)

Fairfield Inn by Marriott Richmond ** (in New Paris, distanced approximately 16 km)

Comfort Inn Rushville *** (in Rushville, distanced approximately 44 km)

Holiday Inn Express Hotel & Suites Greenville ** (in Greenville, distanced approximately 47 km)

Holiday Inn Express Hotel & Suites Brookville ** (in Brookville, distanced approximately 49 km)

more Centerville hotels »

Centerville car rental

Compare Centerville car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Centerville rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Centerville car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Centerville — we will do it for you!

Car hire Centerville and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Centerville the city centre. Compare Centerville car rental offers by various suppliers.

Richmond car rental (distanced approximately 15 km)

New Castle car rental (distanced approximately 35 km)

Oxford car rental (distanced approximately 40 km)

Greenville car rental (distanced approximately 42 km)

Muncie car rental (distanced approximately 56 km)

more offers and Centerville car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Centerville

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Centerville »

Overview of flights to and from United States »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Centerville. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Centerville and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Centerville are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Richmond, IN Richmond Municipal Airport (distanced approximately 15 km) – airport hotels

Connersville Mettle Field Airport (distanced approximately 24 km) – airport hotels

Batesville Airport (distanced approximately 57 km) – airport hotels

Muncie Airport (distanced approximately 58 km) – airport hotels

Middletown, Ohio Hook Field Airport (distanced approximately 61 km) – airport hotels

Centerville 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Centerville in United States

You can also dive right into Centerville on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Centerville 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Centerville, United States in Google Earth »

Get more out of Centerville map

Add placemark to Centerville

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Centerville map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Centerville google map link options

link to us:

small Centerville google map image link

medium Centerville google map image link

large Centerville google map image link