The new movie, Welcome to Me, definitely offers an offensive depiction of borderline. Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a complex and challenging illness for those with expertise; so I wasn't entirely surprised that Welcome to Me failed miserably in representing BPD. If my sentiment wasn't already clear, I hated this film. The TV caricature with a borderline label contained traits uncharacteristic of BPD. The movie, Welcome to Me, is offensive and reckless; this movie transmits misinformation to the public, further stigmatizing borderline personality disorder.

"Welcome to Me" Synopsis

Welcome to Me is a story about a very eccentric woman, who is obsessed with Oprah, goes off her meds, wins the lottery, and funds her very own TV show about nothing but herself. To be clear, it's not a story about someone who just happens to have BPD. The filmmakers very deliberately make it a story about (what they are calling) BPD. They focus on her diagnosis, thereby implying that all her unusual behavior is tied to it. BPD is given as the explanation for why she is the way she is.

The Offensive Depiction of BPD in "Welcome to Me"

The therapist's main concern is that the borderline character has gone off her medication, which not only reinforces mental illness as the culprit for her behavior but misinforms the viewer about the nature of BPD. While some people with BPD are on medications for the treatment of comorbid disorders or the alleviation of specific symptoms, BPD is not an illness that is solved with medications. As a personality disorder, recovery (or more accurately, management) requires intensive therapy, but certainly not the kind depicted in this movie.

The only semi-accurate depiction of anything in this movie is the portrayal of the therapist as sarcastic and condescending, which some borderlines experience due to the stigma around BPD. Most therapists aren't this bad, or this rich, though. (Seriously, if BPD therapists lived in mansions, there would be a lot more incentive and a lot more help.) Regardless, the filmmakers don't make the therapist out to be the bad guy with his uncaring behavior. Instead, the borderline comes across as the utterly ridiculous one.

Most problematically, the filmmakers portray the borderline character as being this narcissistic and/or histrionic, self-centered person without the capacity to feel for other people (specifically, for her friend who loses a job). I was so hurt by such a wildly inaccurate and offensive depiction of borderlines, people who feel deeply for others. While egocentricity may be a part of BPD, as with most mental illnesses, it is due to being confined to oneself by one's own suffering; it is not a self-love, "look at me" kind of exhibitionism. The only reason we'd become self-involved in a scenario similar to that of the movie is in thinking ourselves to blame for the friend's job loss, and we'd hate ourselves for it. The character's compromised ability to recognize the feelings of others is not the result of such a hypersensitivity. Even beyond this scene, most borderlines are too self-loathing and anxious for the entire premise of the film.

The Stigmatizing Catch-All Term, Borderline

On screen, BPD is often a caricature with traits cherry-picked from all the mental disorders to shape the most entertaining character possible. Not only is this Welcome to Me borderline depicted as a histrionic narcissist (two other separate personality disorders in themselves), she's portrayed wearing manic makeup (characteristic of bipolar mania) and as being very eccentric with strange beliefs, behavior, and appearance (she has certain schizotypal traits). Most of the time the character's affect is constricted and she speaks in an awkward monotone. While she's impulsive, hypersexual, and somewhat emotionally reactive, she's also not depressed, self-loathing, or self-harming. It's like the filmmakers read a diagnostic manual and selected a few of the most superficial traits of BPD while excluding the traits that give depth and meaning to the illness of borderline personality disorder.

"Welcome to Me" is an Offensive Depiction of Borderline

Misrepresenting mental illness in the movies is dangerous. Welcome to Me downplayed the seriousness of BPD by portraying it as a charming and endearing personality quirk. The movie also completely misrepresented the disorder, channeling false information into a world already fumbling with the idea of mental illness. A quote from an interview of the creator/screenwriter, Eliot Laurence, exposes his agenda: "I’m kind of fascinated by troubled women."

Go take your fascination elsewhere, Eliot, and stop appropriating our stories, misrepresenting BPD, and exploiting the borderline.