Tributes to Revolutionary Freedom fighter Sardar Udham Singh!

Udham Singh was an Indian revolutionary, best known for assassinating Michael O’Dwyer on 13 March 1940 in what has been described as an avenging of the Jallianwalla Bagh Massacre.

Singh was born Sher Singh on 26 December 1899, at Sunam in the Sangrur district of Punjab, India, to a Kamboj farming family. His father, Tahal Singh, was at that time working as a watchman on a railway crossing in the neighbouring village of Upall . Sher Singh lost his parents before he was seven years and was admitted along with his brother Mukta Singh to the Central Khalsa Orphanage at Amritsar on 24 October 1907.

As both brothers were administered the Sikh initiatory rites at the Orphanage, they received new names, Sher Singh becoming Udham Singh and Mukta Singh became Sadhu Singh. In 1917, Udham Singh’s brother also died, leaving him alone in the world. He received education and crafts training.

Udham Singh left the Orphanage after passing the matriculation examination in 1918.He set up a painters shop with the signboard of Ram Mahammad Singh Azad.

He was present in the Jallianwala Bagh on the fateful Baisakhi day, 13 April 1919, when a peaceful assembly of people was fired upon by General Reginald Edward Harry Dyer, killing over one thousand people. The event which Udham Singh used to recall with anger and sorrow, turned him to the path of revolution. On this day, General Dyer changed the course of Sardar Udham Singh life. Singh was deeply affected by the event. The governor of Punjab, Michael O’Dwyer, had supported the massacre, and Singh held him responsible.

He resolved to wreck vengeance on the perpetrators of this heinous crime, General Dyer, Sir Michael O’Dwyer the Lieutenant Governor, Punjab and Lord Zetland Secretary of State of India. Sardar Udham Singh moved from one country to another country to shoot the murderers of his countrymen..

He felt thrilled to learn about the militant activities of the Babar Akalis, in the early 1920’s, and secretly kept with him, some revolvers and was arrested by the police in Amritsar, and sentenced to four years imprisonment under the Arms Act.

On release in 1931, he returned to his native Sunam, but harassed by the local police, he once again returned to Amritsar and opened a shop as a signboard painter, assuming the name of Ram Muhammad Singh Azad. This name, which he was to use later in England , was adopted to emphasize the unity of all the religious communities in India in their struggle for political freedom..

Udham Singh was deeply influenced by the activities of Bhagat Singh and his revolutionary group. In 1935, when he was on a visit to Kashmir, he was found carrying Bhagat Singh’s portrait. He invariably referred to him as his guru. He loved to sing political songs, and was very fond of Ram Prasad Bismal, who was the leading poet of the revolutionaries. After staying for some months in Kashmir, Udham Singh left India. He wandered about the continent for some time, and reached England by the mid-thirties. He was on the lookout for an opportunity to avenge the Jallianwala Bagh tragedy.

The long-waited moment at last came on 13 March 1940. On that day, at 4.30 p.m. in the Caxton Hall, London, where a meeting of the East India Association was being held in conjunction with the Royal Central Asian Society, Udham Singh fired five to six shots from his pistol at Sir Michael O’Dwyer, who was governor of the Punjab when the Amritsar massacre had taken place. O’Dwyer was hit twice and fell to the ground dead and Lord Zetland, the Secretary of State for India, who was presiding over the meeting was injured. Udham Singh was overpowered with a smoking revolver. He in fact made no attempt to escape and continued saying that he had done his duty for his country. Sardar Udham Singh stood firm and he was chained.

On 1 April 1940, Udham Singh was formally charged with the murder of Sir Michael O’Dwyer. When produced before the Magistrate, he said ‘I did the deed because Sir Michael O’Dwyer wanted to cresh all our aspirations for freedom. I had been after him for full 21 years. I am happy that I have fulfilled my job. I am not afraid of death’.

On 4 June 1940, he was committed to trial, at the Central Criminal Court, Old Bailey, before Justice Atkinson, who sentenced him to death. An appeal was filed on his behalf which was dismissed on 15 July 1940. On 31 July 1940, Udham Singh was hanged in Pentonville Prison in London .

Udham Singh was essentially a man of action and save his statement before the judge at his trial, there was no writing from his pen available to historians. Recently, letters written by him to Shiv Singh Jauhal during his days in prison after the shooting of Sir Michael O’Dwyer have been discovered and published. These letters show him as a man of great courage, with a sense of humour. He called himself a ‘guest of His Majesty King George’, and he looked upon death as a bride he was going to wed. By remaining cheerful to the last and going joyfully to the gallows, he followed the example of Bhagat Singh who had been his beau ideal. During the trial, Udham Singh had made a request that his ashes be sent back to his country, but this was not allowed. In 1975, however, the Government of India, at the instance of the Punjab Government, finally succeeded in bringing his ashes home. Lakhs of people gathered on the occasion to pay homage to his memory.

Udham Singh’s Grandson Jeet Singh Is A Lowly Labourer ????

Udham Singh’s Grandson Jeet Singh Is A Lowly Labourer

Shaheed Udham Singh’s grandson “Jeet Singh” works as a laborer in Punjab. The family has never received any compensation or support from the government. How ironic that a man can give his life for his country and the country in return gives him nothing. He could have “sold out” at any time to the British and lived a life of luxury. Financial stability would have also been secured for many generations of his family. Instead they are working in demeaning conditions. Many political leaders have made promises including the last President Zail Singh but none has come through. Jeet Singh lives in Sangrur village of Punjab with his two sons.

Shivnath Jha and Neena Jha, the husband and wife journalist team from Delhi published the book “Heroes & Martyrs: Their Neglected Descendants 1857-1947”. They cover the stories of 22 families of freedom fighters’ descendents. “We have come a long way since India became independent on 15th August 1947. But it is ironical that the present generation of India does not even know how many young people and freedom fighters laid down their lives for the sake of the country. Even more ironical is the fact that not even five percent population of this huge nation actually remembers those who died during the freedom struggle”.

Have to know current position of his family. The status of his grandson picked from 2 years back article.

But later,

Jeet Singh, grandson of freedom fighter Udham Singh who lived in a penury at Sunam in Sangrur district of Punjab, was felicitated and given a cheque of Rs 11 lakh as financial assistance by an NGO Andolan : Ek Pustak Se.

The cheque was handed over to Jeet Singh by proprietor of Lokmat Times Vijay Darda at a function held here today.

Jeet’s plight came to light when Shivnath Jha, a Delhi-based journalist had started a mission to write a book on freedom fighters and their children. The book – “Forgotten Indian Heroes : Their Neglected Descendants – 1857 – 1947” – was released by Darda at the function.

The is a pictorial coffee-table book has been compiled, edited and published by Shivnath Jha and his wife Nina Jha under the aegis of “Andolan Ek Pustak Se” to provide a dignified life to Jeet. The book comprises the descendants of more than 22 martyrs and their families.

Jeet Singh, a labourer, said: “Now my life will be better with this money. This has happened with the help of the NGO that reached Sangrur asking parental address of my grandfather Udham Singh, who was hanged on July 31, 1940, in Pentonville prison in London on charges of killing Sir Michael O’Dwyer – governor of Punjab when the Jallianwala massacre had taken place.”

“Having seen my financial condition, Jha was gave a commitment to help me. Earlier we had land, but now many of the family members depend on their daily earnings by working in factories and construction sites. I also work as a daily wage worker,” he said.

With tears in his eyes, Jeet said he was proud of his family. He was thankful to Shivanath and Nina Jha and also Vijay Darda for their “much needed” help.

This article is my tribute to one of India’s most spirited revolutionary Shaheed Sardar Udham Singh!

#Jaihind #Vandemataram