The Mahjar Literary Movement was a major landmark in the development of Arabic literature and language, as well as the articulation of the specific Arab-American diasporic experience.

In partnership with the University of Chicago Center for Middle Eastern Studies and with the support of a grant from the US Department of Education, we’ve developed an afikra lesson plan and curricular material that explores the impact of the Mahjar literary movement and the experience of Arab writers in the diaspora.

In this blog, you’ll find a brief introduction to the themes and figures the lesson plan explores.

What was the Mahjar Literary Movement?

The Mahjar (المهجر) was a Romanticist migrant literary movement active from the late 19th to mid-20th century. It was started by Arab writers who had emigrated mostly from Ottoman Lebanon, Syria and Palestine to the US.

They were similar in many ways to the ‘Nahda’ movement that preceded them. Inspired, changed, and influenced by their encounter with the Western world, the Mahjar writers were committed to renewing and reimagining ‘the form and essence of Arabic literature and language.’

The Mahjar movement stemmed from Arabic romanticism which in turn was borne out of Arabic neoclassical poetry. Similar to Western Romanticism, Mahjar writers sought to break out of standard structures, with emphasis on themes such as love, spirituality and the figure of ‘the poet’ as a lone figure.

What does ‘Mahjar’ mean?

Al Mahjar (pronounced: al mah-jar) means the refuge or the diaspora in Arabic. It comes from the Arabic root hajara, which means to leave or abandon.

Born in Bcharre, Lebanon, Khalil Gibran emigrated to Boston at the age of 12. Gibran is best known for his book The Prophet. Beyond his work as an author, though, he also considered himself an artist. He wrote in both English and Arabic, and much of his writing explored the Arab-American immigrant experience.

Gibran was also politically active was particularly outspoken about the Great Famine of Mount Lebanon that took place between 1915 and 1918 during the First World War. In a letter he wrote to Mary Haskell, he accused the Turkish government of purposefully planning the famine. Gibran also wrote a poem dedicated to the victims of the famine entitled ‘Dead Are My People’.

Elia Abu Madi

afikra Lesson plan about the Mahjar Literary Movement

High school teachers looking to include content about the Arab world in their lessons can use afikra’s classroom resource: Between Two Worlds, The Mahjar Literary Movement, which focuses on the Arab-American immigrant experience and its impact on literature and identity.

What’s included?

This resource includes:

Informational slides that are ready for classroom use

Thought-provoking readings

Stimulating discussion questions

Student activities

All together, this resource is designed to help students develop an enduring understanding of how the immigrant experience shaped the writing and thought of Arab writers in America during the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

What will students learn?

To establish a foundation for understanding Mahjar literature, students will delve into the historical context of Arab immigration to the United States. Informational slides and readings will provide an overview of the reasons behind Arab migration, the challenges faced by immigrants, and the formation of Arab-American communities.

By examining primary and secondary sources, students will gain insights into the socio-cultural factors that influenced the writing of Arab writers living in diaspora.

Students will be introduced to important writers of this movement, including Khalil Gibran, Elia Abu Madi and Abd al-Masid Haddad. Students will also explore themes such as cultural identity, assimilation, displacement, nostalgia, and cultural dialogue between East and West. Discussion questions will encourage students to analyze the unique ways in which the Al-Mahjar writers portrayed these themes, as well as the similarities and differences among their works.

This resource paves the way for fostering empathy, promoting cultural understanding, and encouraging students to appreciate the rich tapestry of voices within their own classrooms and beyond.

Download the lesson plan below (or click here if it doesn’t load)