Christopher Buck, “Kahlil Gibran.” American Writers: A Collection of Literary Biographies. Supplement XX. Edited by Jay Parini. Farmington Hills, MI: Scribner’s Reference/The Gale Group, 2010. Pp. 113–129. KAHLIL GIBRAN (1883–1931) Christopher Buck The Arab American author and artist Kahlil Gibran was a best-selling writer whose work has yet to receive critical acclaim equal to his popular appeal. There is no question that Gibran’s work in Arabic was central to the development of twentieth-century Arabic literature—in that Arab Romanticism begins with Gibran, the pivotal figure in the Mahjar movement of émigré Arab writers centered in New York. There is also no question that Kahlil Gibran’s masterpiece, The Prophet (1923)—a small volume of aphorisms (wise sayings) offering pithy wisdom of an almost prophetic quality—belongs to world literature, for it is known and loved the world over. As an American man of letters, however, Gibran has received scant attention by American literary critics. Since The Prophet has yet to be widely recognized as an American classic, and the author yet to be fully accepted as an American writer, Gibran’s inclusion in the American Writers series requires some justification. Eminent scholars including Irfan Shahid (professor emeritus at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C.) and Suheil Bushrui (professor emeritus and current director of the Kahlil Gibran Chair for Values and Peace at the University of Maryland at College Park) have made the case for Gibran’s recognition as an American writer worthy of note. According to Bushrui, America is entitled to claim Gibran as one of its sons (even if not a native son) as fully and as authentically as his native Lebanon can lay such claim: “In his work, he became not only Gibran of Lebanon, but Gibran of America, indeed Gibran the voice of global consciousness” (1996, p. 10). After all, the young Gibran spent only the first twelve years of his life in Bsharri (a village near the famous “Cedars of God”), where he was born in 1883, before emigrating with his family to the United States. Apart from a two-year study in Paris and two brief return visits to Lebanon, Gibran spent his entire adult life—the last two-thirds of his life, in fact—entirely on American soil, dying in New York at the age of forty-eight. In The Prophet, the city of Orphalese is often said to represent America (or New York). Shahid underscores the fact The Prophet was America’s best-selling book of the twentieth century, not counting the Bible, and that Gibran outsold all other American poets, from Walt Whitman to Robert Frost. According to Gibran’s New York publisher, Alfred A. Knopf, The Prophet has sold more than ten million copies. The book’s success was due entirely to its own appeal, as Knopf never promoted it. Strangely, Gibran is arguably America’s best-loved prose-poet, whose market appeal continues despite critical indifference. It’s true that Gibran had what might be called a double psyche, and inhabited two thought-worlds at once. As an Arab American, Gibran wrote in two languages: English and Arabic. Arabic was his mother tongue, and English his second language. As an accomplished man of letters of considerable influence in the Middle East, Gibran inspired a literary renaissance in the Arab world, such that all modern Arabic poetry bears the marks of Gibran’s. Yet Gibran’s work has had little influence in American letters, despite its enormous popular appeal. Notwithstanding, Shahid thinks that Gibran has not been fairly treated as an American writer. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that, categorically, The Prophet exists in splendid isolation, severed from its Arabic cultural roots. And so The Prophet will have to be evaluated, or reevaluated, on its own literary merits and for its singular contribution to the American literary heritage.

This study is a cosmopolitan multiculturalist interpretation of history and literature: a study of five writers, all born in early twentieth-century Mexico, descendants of immigrants from the Eastern Mediterranean then under Ottoman imperial control. It is an inquiry into the conditions and meanings of the identifications of the Lebanese of Mexico through their establishment and maintenance of cultural institutions and their creation, appropriation, and ignorance of literature in Spanish and Arabic in the twentieth century. A history of the immigration is presented with terms for both the immigration (Levantine) and the communities (Lebanese) based on a theoretical framework that separates the categories of analysis from the categories of practice. The distinction allows for the explanation of essentialist primordial concepts of identity to be described within constructivist circumstantialist concepts of identification. This changes the discussion from the entity of identity to events of identification, though it does not preclude agents themselves conceiving of identity as reified. The distinction of analysis from practice removes the apparent contradictions of agents' identifications and persons unrecognizable to the agents can be introduced. Ordered by their current importance to the Lebanese of Mexico, the writers are presented and analyzed in their relational and categorical identifications with the Lebanese of Mexico: relational in their family histories, categorical in the histories of their works considered as Lebanese. Jaime Sabines is praised as Lebanese, though he never foregrounds his heritage in his poetry. The novels of Hector Azar and Barbara Jacobs mediate between history and fiction. Gabriel Zaid deviates from any categorical identifications. Albir Adib, who wrote in Arabic, is unknown within Mexico; his presentation here intervenes in the categorical identifications of the Lebanese. Each chapter presents an aspect of Lebanese identifications; together they reveal the complexities of what it means to identify with the Lebanese of Mexico.