Brian Benben

Birth Name: Brian Edward Benben

Place of Birth: Winchester, Frederick County, Virginia, U.S.

Date of Birth: June 18, 1956

Ethnicity: Polish, likely German, other

Brian Benben is an American actor. He is married to actress Madeleine Stowe.

Brian’s paternal grandparents were Edward Benben (the son of John Benben and Tacyjana Baj) and Agnes Kozera/Kozyra (the daughter of Michael Kozyra and Mary Lesko). Edward was born in Stare Miasto, Poland. Agnes was also of Polish origin.

Sources: Marriage record of Brian’s paternal grandparents, Edward Benben and Agnes Kozera/Kozyra – https://familysearch.org

Brian’s mother on the 1930 U.S. Census – https://familysearch.org

↧

↧

David Burtka

Birth Name: David Michael Burtka

Place of Birth: Dearborn, Michigan, U.S.

Date of Birth: May 29, 1975

Ethnicity: Polish

David Burtka is an American actor and professional chef.

David is the son of Deborah A. “Debbie” (Zajas) and Daniel Burtka. David’s parents are both of Polish ancestry. He is married to actor Neil Patrick Harris.

David’s paternal grandfather was Walter Joseph Burtka (the son of Jozef/Joseph Burtka and Katarzyna/Katrina Kaminska). David’s great-grandfather Jozef was born in Poland, the son of Joseph Burtka and Catherine Sinta. David’s great-grandmother Katarzyna was born in Warsaw, Poland, the daughter of Frank Kaminski and Mary.

David’s paternal grandmother was Genevieve Bialy (the daughter of Frank Bialy and Josephine Baczewski). Genevieve was born in Pennsylvania, to parents from Poland.

David’s maternal grandfather was Theodore S. Zajas (the son of Francis J. Zajas and Anna/Anne Ciuraj). Francis was born in Oświęcim, Poland. Anna was born in Michigan, to parents from Poland, Frank Ciuraj and Mary.

David’s maternal grandmother was Eleanore/Eleanor B. Szczesny (the daughter of Stanly/Stanley Szczesny and Helen Bercal). Stanly was born in Poland, the son of Alexander Szczesny and Mary Radzikowska. Helen was born in Michigan, of Polish descent.

Sources: Genealogy of David Burtka – http://www.geni.com

David’s paternal grandmother, Genevieve Bialy, on the 1930 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

↧

Darin Brooks

Birth Name: Darin Lee Brooks

Place of Birth: Honolulu, Hawaii, U.S.

Date of Birth: May 27, 1984

Ethnicity: Irish, Polish, Belgian, Norwegian

Darin Brooks is an American actor. Darin is married to Canadian actress Kelly Kruger.

Darin is the son of Susan and Don Brooks. Darin has stated that he has Norwegian roots. His other roots are said to be Polish, Irish, and Belgian.

Source: http://archives.midweek.com

Photo by kathclick/Bigstock.com

↧

Timothée Kolodziejczak

Place of Birth: Arras, France

Date of Birth: 1 October, 1991

Ethnicity:

*Polish (father)

*Martiniquais (mother)

Timothée Kolodziejczak is a professional football player who was born in Avion, France. His mother is from Martinique, whereas his father has Polish roots. He was a member of the Lens academy but his debut came as a 17-year-old for Lyon.

Source: https://www.borussia.de

↧

Gore Verbinski

Birth Name: Gregor Verbinski

Place of Birth: Oak Ridge, Tennessee, U.S.

Date of Birth: March 16, 1964

Ethnicity:

*Polish (father)

*Irish (mother)

Gore Verbinski is an American film director, screenwriter, and musician.

Gore is the son of Laurette Ann (McGovern) and Victor Vincent Verbinski. Gore’s father was a first-generation American, of Polish descent. All of Gore’s mother’s grandparents were Irish.

Gore’s paternal grandparents were Benjamin “Benny” Verbinski and Pauline Jachimowicz/Zackmowicz/Yackavomisk. Benjamin and Pauline were from Poland.

Gore’s maternal grandfather was Patrick Joseph McGovern (the son of Owen McGovern and Bridget McGovern). Patrick was born in Pennsylvania, to parents from the Binkeeragh and Tongelee Townlands, County Cavan, Ireland. Owen was the son of Patrick McGovern and Bridget Dolan. Gore’s great-grandmother Bridget McGovern was the daughter of James McGovern and Anna Curran.

Gore’s maternal grandmother was Loretta Ferrick (the daughter of Michael Ferrick and Sarah O’Melia). Loretta was born in New York, to parents from Ireland.

Sources: Gore’s father on the 1930 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Gore’s father – http://www.legacy.com

Marriage record of Gore’s paternal grandparents, Benjamin “Benny” Verbinski and Pauline Jachimowicz/Zackmowicz/Yackavomisk – http://www.familysearch.org

Genealogy of Gore’s maternal grandfather, Patrick Joseph McGovern – http://www.ancestry.com

Gore’s maternal grandmother, Loretta Ferrick, on the 1910 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Photo by s_bukley/www.bigstockphoto.com

↧

↧

Mariee Sioux

Birth Name: Mariee Sioux Sobonya

Place of Birth: Humboldt County, California, United States

Date of Birth: February 4, 1985

Ethnicity:

*Hungarian, Polish, Croatian (father)

*Mexican(Spanish, Indigenous), Paiute Native American

Mariee Sioux is an American folk singer-songwriter.

Mariee’s paternal grandfather was probably Paul Joseph Sobonya, son of Hungarian immigrants Steve Sobonya and Elizabeth Muska.

Mariee’s paternal grandmother is Catherine Dorothy Bistrovich, daughter of John/Izidor Bistrovich/Bistrović-Pić and Victoria/Wiktoria Money/Pieniadz. Izidor was from Bednja, Yugoslavia, and was of Croatian ancestry, while Wiktoria was Polish from Januszkowice, Podkarpackie Voivodeship. Izidor was the son of Franjo Bistrović-Pić and Jana Češnjaj.

Her mother is said to be of Mexican and Paiute Native American descent. Her maternal grandparents are Henry Holguin and Carolina B. Salazar.

Source:

Mariee’s paternal grandmother Dorothy Bistrovich on 1930 U.S. census-familysearch.org

Baptism record of Mariee’s paternal great-grandfather Izidor Bistrović-Pić –familysearch.org

↧

Zack Greinke

Birth Name: Donald Zackary Greinke

Place of Birth: Orlando, Florida

Date of Birth: October 21, 1983

Ethnicity: German, English, likely Polish

Family Background: Zack Greinke is an American professional baseball pitcher for the Arizona Diamondbacks of Major League Baseball.

Greinke is the son of Donald Ray Greinke and Marsha Ann Wilkin.

His paternal grandparents were most likely Raymond Siegfred Greinke and Eleanor S. Skonieczny.

Source: http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~battle/celeb/greinke.htm

↧

Sabina Gadecki

Birth Name: Sabina H. Gadecki

Place of Birth: Chicopee, Massachusetts, U.S.

Date of Birth: September 28, 1983

Ethnicity: Polish

Sabina Gadecki is an American model and actress.

Sabina is the daughter of Irena S. and Richard Gadecki. Sabina’s parents were born in Poland.

Sabina’s paternal grandfather is Edward Gadecki.

Sabina’s paternal grandmother was Maria Sulikowska (the daughter of Gracjan Sulikowski and Maria Sawicka). Sabina’s grandmother Maria was born in Ciemnym, Poland.

Source: Obituary of Sabina’s paternal grandmother, Maria (Sulikowska) Gadecki – http://www.kozikowskifuneralhome.com

http://www.masslive.com

Photo by kathclick/www.bigstockphoto.com

↧

Carah Faye Charnow

Place of Birth: Santa Barbara, California, United States

Date of Birth: August 3, 1984

Ethnicity: Polish (paternal grandfather), Spanish, German, Scottish, English

Carah Faye Charnow is an American singer and songwriter. Carah is known for being the female vocalist of rock bands Shiny Toy Guns and Versant. Carah was raised in Newbury Park, California.

Carah’s paternal grandfather was Walter Charnow. Walter was Polish. While many Charnow families are Jewish, it is not clear if Walter was Jewish. He had a cross on his grave.

Carah’s paternal grandmother was Grace Adele Smith (the daughter of Fred Myron Smith and Mary/Marie A. Lopez). Mary/Marie A.’s father was Spanish.

Carah’s maternal grandfather was Arnold E. Moselle/Mosel (the son of Alfred/Segrid Rudolph Mosel and Plesence/Pleseuver McLay). Alfred was born in Berlin, Germany. Plesence was born in Michigan, to a father from Scotland, Murdock McLay, and a mother from Canada, Minnie Fox.

Carah’s maternal grandmother was Barbara Edwin MacFadden (the daughter of Joel/Janel Parkhurst MacFadden and Fay Agnes MacDonald). Barbara was born in Canada, to American parents. Joel was the son of Hugh MacFadden and Katherine Parkhurst. Fay was the daughter of T. B. MacDonald and Louisa.

Sources: Death record of Carah’s paternal grandfather, Walter Charnow – https://www.findagrave.com

Carah’s paternal grandmother, Grace Adele Smith, on the 1920 U.S. Census – https://www.familysearch.org

Death record of Carah’s paternal grandmother, Grace Adele (Smith) Charnow – https://www.findagrave.com

Carah’s maternal grandfather, Arnold E. Moselle/Mosel, on the 1930 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Marriage record of Carah’s maternal grandparents, Arnold E. Moselle/Mosel and Barbara Edwin MacFadden – http://www.familysearch.org

Photo by kathclick/www.bigstockphoto.com

↧

↧

Betsy Brandt

Birth Name: Betsy Ann Brandt

Place of Birth: Bay City, Michigan, U.S.

Date of Birth: November 14, 1973

Ethnicity: German [including Alsatian], English, Irish, Polish

Betsy Brandt is an American actress.

Betsy is the daughter of Janet J. (Wirbel/Wirbul) and Gary Brandt. Betsy’s father is mostly of German and English, along with some Irish, descent. Betsy’s mother has German (including Alsatian) and Polish roots.

Betsy’s paternal grandfather was Edward Robert Brandt (the son of Julius Robert Brandt and Augusta Stark/Storck). Edward was born in Pennsylvania, to parents from either Russia or Germany, who were both of German descent.

Betsy’s paternal grandmother was Maud/Maude May Knight (the daughter of William Malcolm/Malcom Knight and Anna Barbara Dietlein). William was the son of Adam Clark Knight and Calista Rolizza Mosher. Anna was the daughter of Johann Vitus Dietlein and Eva Margaretha Lang, who were from Bavaria, Germany.

Betsy’s maternal grandfather was Louis J. “Louie” Wirbel/Wirbul (the son of Jacob Wirbel/Wirbul and Lena Huber). Jacob was born in Germany, the son of Peter Wirbel and Margaret Spercher.. Lena was born in Alsace-Lorraine (now part of France), the daughter of Eigen Huber and Anna M. Treik.

Betsy’s maternal grandmother was Sadie Julia Luptowski (the daughter of Joseph Martin Luptowski and Mary Goik/Goyk). Joseph was the son of Anthony Luptowski and Susan “Susie” Ringwelski/Ryzalski, who were from either Poland or Germany. Mary was the daughter of Paul Goyk and Julia Haas, who were also from either Poland or Germany.

Sources: http://www.mlive.com

Betsy’s father, Gary Brandt, on the 1940 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Betsy’s mother, Janet J. (Wirbel/Wirbul), on the 1940 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Genealogy of Betsy’s paternal grandparents – http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com

Betsy’s paternal grandfather, Edward Robert Brandt, on the 1920 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Betsy’s great-aunt (paternal grandfather’s sister), Violet Esther (Brandt) Kernstock – http://www.legacy.com

Marriage record of Betsy’s maternal great-grandparents, Jacob Wirbel/Wirbul and Lena Huber – http://www.familysearch.org

Marriage record of Betsy’s maternal great-grandparents, Joseph Martin Luptowski and Mary Goik/Goyk – http://www.familysearch.org

Photo by kathclick/www.bigstockphoto.com

↧

Nick Waterhouse

Birth Name: Nicholas Ryan Waterhouse

Place of Birth: Santa Ana, Orange, California, United States

Date of Birth: February 8, 1986

Ethnicity: German, English, Polish, possibly other

Nick Waterhouse is an American singer, songwriter, and record producer.

Nick’s maternal grandfather was Aloys/Aloise Philip Raupp, son of Alois John Raupp and Caroline Maria Wagner. Alois John was the son of John Raupp (son of Melchior Michael Raupp from Bavaria and Maria Theobald from Rhineland-Palatinate) and Mary Margaret Weidner (daughter of German immigrants Jacob Weidner and Barbara Lunz). Caroline was the daughter of Andrew Wagner (son of Michael Wagner and Kunigunda Leselle Kraus, both from Bavaria) and Maria C. Musser (daughter of Friedrick Johann Musser and Regina Rachel Hellriegel, both from Baden-Württemberg).

Nick’s maternal grandmother was Dorothy Ethel Schmitt, daughter of Joseph G. Schmitt and Irene A. Mayzure. Joseph was the son of John W. Schmitt (born in Illinois to German immigrant parents William Schmitt and Margaret Engels) and Annie Neugebauer (born in Germany to John Neugebauer and Emily Nues). Irene was the daughter of Walter Mayzure/Mazurowski (born in Poland to Anton Mazurowski) and Catherine Novak (daughter of Paul/Pawel Nowak and Anna Kaja).

Sources: Genealogy of Nick’s maternal grandfather – findagrave.com

Birth record of Nick’s maternal grandmother – familysearch.org

Nick’s maternal great-grandfather Joseph Schmitt on a 1910 U.S. census – familysearch.org

Nick’s maternal great-grandmother Irene Mayzure on a 1920 U.S. census – familysearch.org

Photo by kathclick/Bigstock.com

↧

Kasha Kropinski

Birth Name: Katarzynka Kropiński

Place of Birth: South Africa

Date of Birth: August 27, 1991

Ethnicity: Polish, English, possibly other

Kasha Kropinski is a South African-born American actress, voice over artist, and ballerina.

Kasha is the daughter of Deborah “Debbie” (Adkins) Cochrane and Jacek Kropiński.

Kasha’s father is a Zambian-born photographer and film director, of Polish descent. Kasha’s mother is a South African model and make-up artist.

Sources: http://www.twitter.com

http://www.debbiecochrane.com

Photo by s_bukley/www.bigstockphoto.com

↧

Peter Farrelly

Birth Name: Peter John Farrelly

Place of Birth: Phoenixville, Pennsylvania, U.S.

Date of Birth: December 17, 1956

Ethnicity:

*75% Irish

*25% Polish

Peter Farrelly is an American film director, screenwriter, producer, and novelist.

Peter is the son of Mariann/Marion (Neary) and Robert Leo Farrelly. Peter’s brother is film director Bobby Farrelly. They were raised in Cumberland, Rhode Island.

Peter’s paternal grandfather was Peter Leo Farrelly (the son of John J. Farrelly and Rose Brady). Peter’s grandfather Peter was born in Rhode Island, to parents from Ireland.

Peter’s paternal grandmother was Anna M. Osmanski. Anna was Polish.

Peter’s maternal grandparents were John J. Neary, Sr. and Bessie T. Hannon. John and Bessie were Irish.

Sources: Genealogy of Peter Farrelly – http://www.geni.com

Peter’s father on the 1940 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Peter’s father – http://www.legacy.com

Peter’s mother on the 1940 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Peter’s uncle (mother’s brother), Maurice James Neary – http://www.memorialsolutions.com

↧

↧

Andy Mientus

Birth Name: Andrew M. Mientus

Place of Birth: Ross Township, Allegheny, Pennsylvania, U.S.

Date of Birth: November 10, 1986

Ethnicity:

*Polish, possibly some Austrian (father)

*Irish, Italian (mother)

Andy Mientus is an American stage and television actor and singer. Andy is married to actor, singer, and composer Michael Arden.

Andy is the son of Jean Marie (Gleeson) and Robert J. Mientus. Andy has stated that he is of one half Polish, one quarter Italian, and one quarter Irish, descent.

Andy’s paternal grandfather was Joseph A. Mientus (the son of John/Jon Mientus and Annie/Anna Pokracki/Pocratsky). John was Polish. Annie was born in Pennsylvania, to parents from Poland.

Andy’s paternal grandmother was Josephine Chernek (the daughter of Joseph Chernek and Elizabeth Steish/Steis). Joseph was from Poland. Elizabeth was born in Poland, to parents from Austria.

Andy’s maternal grandfather was Morgan Francis Gleeson.

Andy’s maternal grandmother was Mary Rose Lavachielli (the daughter of Matteo “Matthew” Lavacchielli/Lavachielli and Ernestina Costa). Matteo and Ernestina were Italian.

Sources: Marriage record of Andy’s parents – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Andy’s father – http://www.legacy.com

Obituary of Andy’s aunt (father’s sister), Joanne (Mientus) Nedrow – http://www.legacy.com

Andy’s paternal grandfather on the 1930 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Andy’s paternal grandfather – http://www.newspapers.com

Andy’s paternal grandmother on the 1930 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Andy’s paternal great-uncle (grandmother’s brother), Harry T. Chernek – http://www.legacy.com

Andy’s maternal grandmother on the 1940 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Andy’s maternal grandmother – http://wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com

↧

Christine Woods

Birth Name: Christine Elizabeth Woods

Place of Birth: El Toro (Lake Forest),Orange County, California, United States

Date of Birth: September 3, 1983

Ethnicity: English, Polish, some Dutch, possibly Norwegian and Irish

Christine Woods is an American actress.

Christine is sometimes described as Irish American.

Christine’s paternal grandfather was Sterling Allen Woods, son of Roy Emmie Woods and Marion May Parish. Roy was the son of Ira Palmer Woods (son of Hannibal Woods and Electa Allen) and Nevina Georgiana Harris (daughter of Hiram Harris and Martha J. Weaver). Marion was the daughter of Fred Parish (son of John Parish and Clara S. Hill) and Ora De Wolf (daughter of Myron Dewolf and Julia Gray).

Christine’s paternal grandmother was Sylvia Mary Ostrowski, daughter of John Aloysius Ostrowski and Mary Sobota. John was born in Minnesota to Polish parents Stanislaw Ostrowski and Maria. Mary was also born in Minnesota to Polish parents.

Christine’s maternal grandparents have last names Nielsen and Armstrong.

Source:

Marriage record of Christine’s paternal grandparents-familysearch.org

Marriage record of Christine’s paternal great-grandparents Roy Emmie Woods and Marion May Parish-familysearch.org

Christine’s paternal great-great-grandfather Ira Palmer Woods on 1870 U.S. census-familysearch.org

Genealogy of Christine’s paternal great-great-grandmother Nevina Georgiana Harris-findagrave.com

Genealogy of Christine’s paternal great-great-great-grandmother Electa Allen-findagrave.com

Marriage record of Christine’s paternal great-great-grandparents Fred Parish and Ora De Wolf-familysearch.org

Christine’s paternal great-grandfather John Aloysius Ostrowski on 1900 U.S. census-familysearch.org

↧

Jimmy Garoppolo

Birth Name: James R. Garoppolo

Place of Birth: Arlington Heights, Illinois, U.S.

Date of Birth: November 2, 1991

Ethnicity: Italian, Polish, German

Jimmy is an American football quarterback for the New England Patriots of the National Football League.

Garoppolo is the son of Anthony J. Garoppolo and Denise F. (Malec) Garoppolo.

Jimmy’s paternal grandfather may have been Anthony Garoppolo who was the son of Rose and Anthony Garopollo who were both Italian immigrants.

Jimmy’s maternal grandparents were Theodore J. Malec (the son of John Malec and Katherine Stopa) and Harriet D. Seidel (the daughter of Frank Seidel and Julia Rogalu).

Sources: https://www.familysearch.org~ (census of Jimmy’s mother, including her maiden name)

https://www.familysearch.org~(Possibly the census of Jimmy’s paternal grandfather)

↧

Bob Murawski

Birth Name: Robert Lee Murawski

Place of Birth: Detroit, Michigan, U.S.

Date of Birth: June 14, 1964

Ethnicity: Polish, German

Bob Murawski is an American film editor and distributor. Bob is married to filmmaker and film editor Chris Innis.

Bob is the son of Lillian “Lil” M. (Seltz) Armstead and Bernard J. “Ben” Murawski. Bob’s parents had Polish and German roots.

Bob’s paternal grandfather was Leo Murawski (the son of Frank Murawski/Murowskie and Clara Horetski). Frank was born in Michigan to parents from Poland, Andrew Muraski/Murowskie and Katie Ranshefski. Clara was also born in Michigan to Polish parents, Valentine Horetski and Weroneka Jebonski.

Bob’s paternal grandmother was Agnes M. Rice (the daughter of James Rice and Mary Prange). James and Mary were from Germany.

Bob’s maternal grandfather was Frederick H. “Fred” Seltz (the son of Frederick/Fredk Seltz and Pauline Schudebaugh/Sneidenbach). Frederick and Pauline were from Germany.

Bob’s maternal grandmother was Wilhelmina M. “Minnie” Stutzky (the daughter of Frederick/Fredk W. Stutzky and Augusta Lars/Laas). Frederick was the son of Fredric Stutzky and Amelia Royonsky. Augusta was the daughter of Charles Laas and Minnie Recher.

Sources: Obituary of Bob’s father – http://www.familysearch.org

Bob’s paternal grandmother on the 1930 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Bob’s paternal grandmother – http://www.legacy.com

Obituary of Bob’s aunt (mother’s sister), Bernice May (Seltz) Ertman – http://www.michigansthumb.com

Marriage record of Bob’s maternal grandparents, Frederick H. “Fred” Seltz and Wilhelmina M. “Minnie” Stutzky – http://www.familysearch.org

↧

↧

Andrew Dost

Birth Name: Andrew Paul Dost

Place of Birth: Cass City, Michigan, U.S.

Date of Birth: April 10, 1983

Ethnicity:

*German, Polish, French-Canadian (father)

*Hungarian, English (mother)

Andrew Dost is an American musician and multi-instrumentalist. Andrew is most known for being a member of rock band Fun., alongside Jack Antonoff and Nate Ruess.

Andrew is the son of Cheryl A. (Kozan) and Mark Stephen Dost. Andrew’s father has German, Polish, and French-Canadian (with roots in Brittany) ancestry. Andrew’s mother is mostly of Hungarian and English descent.

Andrew’s paternal grandfather was John Robert Dost (the son of Paul G. Dost and Helen Reinsch). Paul and Helen were from Germany.

Andrew’s paternal grandmother was Shirley M. Forton (the daughter of Bernard Frank “Bernie” Forton and Sarah Sylvia “Sally” Baker). Bernard was the son of Jerome Louis Forton and Elizabeth DeTour. Sarah was the daughter of Lawrence Baker/Piekarski, who was from either Poland or Germany, and of Magdalene “Maggie” Horkey/Horton/Hooka, who was also from either Poland or Germany.

Andrew’s maternal grandfather was Andrew Kozan (the son of George/Gergely Kozan and Mary/Maria Molenar/Molnar). Andrew was born in Markage, Saskatchewan, Canada, to parents from Istensegits, Bukovina, Austria-Hungary (now Satu Mare, Romania), who were of Hungarian descent. George was the son of Stephan Kozan and Vera Santo.

Andrew’s maternal grandmother was Lula Mae “LuLu” Ashmore (the daughter of William H. Ashmore and Helen/Hellen Margaret Herrington). William was the son of John Ashmore, whose own parents were English, and of Lydia Halstead. Helen was the daughter of Frank G. Herrington and Addie L. Merritt.

Sources: Andrew’s paternal grandfather on the 1920 U.S. Census – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Andrew’s paternal grandfather – http://www.familysearch.org

Marriage record of Andrew’s paternal great-grandparents, Bernard Frank “Bernie” Forton and Sarah Sylvia Baker – http://www.familysearch.org

Obituary of Andrew’s uncle (mother’s brother), Andrew Louis Kozan – http://www.hansenfuneralhome.net

Obituary of Andrew’s maternal grandfather – http://www.findagrave.com

Information about Andrew’s maternal great-grandfather, George/Gergely Kazan –

http://www.findagrave.com

http://worldconnect.rootsweb.ancestry.com

Death record of Andrew’s maternal great-grandfather, George/Gergely Kazan – www.familysearch.org

Marriage record of Andrew’s maternal great-grandparents, William H. Ashmore and Helen Herrington – http://www.familysearch.org

↧

Peter Porte

Birth Name: Peter J. Porte

Place of Birth: Greenwood Lake, New York, U.S.

Date of Birth: March 29, 1984

Ethnicity:

*Italian (father)

*Polish (mother)

Peter Porte is an American actor.

Peter is said to be a first-generation American; his father has roots in Italy and his mother is from Poland.

Peter has stated:

Well, the first show I ever did was when I was in third grade. Basically, it was a pageant about Christopher Columbus, and I know I only got the part because I had a somewhat period costume. My mother is from Poland, and she had a very traditional Polish garb that looked somewhat European. So they made me Christopher Columbus.

Source: http://www.bellomag.com

Photo by kathclick/www.bigstockphoto.com

↧

Meaghan Waller

Birth Name: Meaghan DeWarrenne-Waller

Place of Birth: Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada

Date of Birth: October 16, 1989

Ethnicity:

*Ukrainian, Polish, English, possibly Icelandic and other (father)

*Scottish (mother)

Meaghan Waller is a Canadian fashion model. Meaghan is known for being the winner of the third season of Canada’s Next Top Model.

Meaghan is the daughter of Val and Richard Waller. Meaghan has a brother, Matthew. They were raised in Charleswood, Winnipeg, Manitoba.

It is said that her mother is of Scottish descent and her father is of Icelandic, Polish, Ukrainian, and other, ancestry.

Meaghan’s paternal grandfather was Barry Waller. “Waller” is usually an English surname.

Meaghan’s paternal grandmother was Elizabeth “Bette” Cherneski (the daughter of Joseph Adam Cherneski and Ann/Anne Presunka). Ann was born in either Poland or Austria, the daughter of and George Presunka and Teenie Goran.

Sources: http://www.winnipegfreepress.com

Obituary of Meaghan’s paternal grandmother – http://passages.winnipegfreepress.com

Obituary of Meaghan’s paternal great-grandmother, Ann/Anne (Presunka) Cherneski – http://newspaperarchive.com

Obituary of Meghan’s paternal great-grandmother’s sister, Mary (Presunka) Stralak – http://newspaperarchive.com

Obituary of Meaghan’s paternal great-great-grandfather, George Presunka – http://newspaperarchive.com

↧