For the Americans, New Guinea served as a strategic point in the second stage of their offensive against the Japanese at Rabaul on the southwest Pacific Island of New Britain. Taken from the Australians in January 1942, Rabaul had been transformed by the Japanese into their most important defense base in the Southwest Pacific region. By the summer of 1943, about 100,000 Japanese troops were stationed there. With New Guinea in their grasp, Japanese forces could also cut communications between the US and Australia. It could also easily dominate other neighboring islands.

US troops fought alongside Australian soldiers in hopes of halting Japan’s advances in the Southwest Pacific. Teams of Military Intelligence Service (MIS) Nisei accompanied both Australian and American forces first at Buna, a major air base on the northern coast of New Guinea, and then at every battle that occurred along the island’s coasts. The Nisei linguists were at the forward area as well as at the rear, furiously translating captured documents and interrogating POWs amid grueling conditions.

In the first year of the second stage of the campaign, from January 1943 to January 1944, the Allied forces suffered nearly 24,000 casualties, with the large majority of these, about 16,800, Australian. In the latter part of the second stage leading up to the recapture of New Guinea, battle casualties were about 9,500, mainly American.

Battles were also fought on several islands along the coast, with particularly fierce jungle warfare in western New Guinea. Roughly four MIS linguist teams, approximately 20-30 men, were shipped to New Guinea.

Just prior to his landing at Lae in September 1943, Staff Sergeant Kazuo Kozaki, one of the original graduates from the Fourth Army Intelligence School and then under the 9th Australian Division, was caught by strafing which killed more than a hundred Allied soldiers. He hit the deck but was struck on his backside. He saved one officer’s life during the incident, and endured the pain for three days before finally seeking medical treatment. For his bravery, he earned a Silver Star, the first for a Nisei soldier in World War II, and a Purple Heart.

Nisei linguists participated in the landings at Aitape and Hollandia, in the Netherlands New Guinea, beginning in April 1944. Two divisions with a Nisei team each were at Hollandia. The 41st Infantry Division had a team led by two Caucasian officers and a senior Nisei officer, Staff Sergeant John M. Tanikawa, a 42-year old World War I veteran who had been an instructor at Camp Savage. At Hollandia, the MIS Nisei translated scores of captured documents and helped as interpreters for the thousands of Japanese POWs that were kept in the prison compound constructed there. By December 1944, Hollandia had developed into a “miniature ATIS,” with nearly 50 officers and 150 enlisted.

On June 23, 1944, Technical Sergeant Yukitaka Terry Mizutari, a Hilo, Hawaii, native who led the language team with the 112th Calvary Regimental Combat Team at the landing on Arawe, took a bullet to the chest while defending his team from a surprise attack at the command post. Mizutari was the first Nisei to die in combat in the Pacific. For his bravery, he was posthumously awarded a Silver Star.