To celebrate the release of Max Max Collection, out for the first time on Blu-Ray on 19th August, we take a trip through history and back to present day with some of the actors from the iconic film trilogy.

Jessie- Joanne Samuel

Samuel remains best known for her role as Max’s wife, although she continued to appear in action films such as Gallagher’s Travels and Watch the Shadows Dance. She also played Mrs Bingle in the kid’s film The Wiggles!

Toecutter- Hugh Keays-Byrne

Keays-Byrne became internationally known for his role as Toecutter in the first Mad Max film, although in Australia he has continued to be a well-known TV and film actor ever since. Notable performances include his role as Mr.Stubb in the TV series Moby Dick and his lead in the sci-fi TV series Farscape.

Jim Goose- Steve Bisley

After Mad Max, Bisley was on high demand in Australian TV and cinema. He appeared in popular TV series such as G.P, Police Rescue and Water Rats. More recently, Bisley played the role of Dan Cody in Baz Luhrmann’s film The Great Gatsby.

The Gyro Captain- Bruce Spence

Since his iconic turn as the Gyro Captain in Mad Max 2, Spence managed to build a large fan base thanks to a number popular sci-fi and fantasy roles, including the Mouth of Sauron in The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, the Trainman in The Matrix Revolutions or Tion Medon in Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith. He also played the voice of Chum in Finding Nemo!

Pappagallo- Michael Preston

Brit Michael Preston was, in addition to an actor, a former boxer and singer who bagged three Top 40 hits in the UK singles charts with his first album, Dirty Old Town, produced by the legendary Joe Meek. The role of Pappagallo in Max Max 2 remains his best known role.

The Feral kid- Emil Minty

One of the most memorable characters from Mad Max 2, Minty played the part of the feisty mute kid who takes a shine to Max and becomes his side-kick. Following the success of the film, he had minor parts in the likes of Fluteman and The Winds of Jarrah. He didn’t however continue to pursue an acting career, and to this day can be found managing a jewellery store in his native Sydney.

Aunty Entity- Tina Turner

Already one of the world’s biggest music stars before her starring role in Mad Max: Beyond Thunderdome, Turner’s success continued to grow with multi-million selling records, sold-out world tours and duets with the likes of Bryan Adams, David Bowie, Eric Clapton and Mick Jagger. She stills performs to this day and in 2005 became one of the five recipients of the Kennedy Center Honors, the highest form of recognition of excellence in the arts in America.

The Limited Edition Fuel-Can Max Max Collection Box set is out on Blu-Ray now

We hope you're enjoying BRWC. You should check us out on our social channels, subscribe to our newsletter, and tell your friends. BRWC is short for battleroyalewithcheese.

Trending on BRWC:

Cool Posts From Around the Web: