Director - Joanne Samuel

Joanne Samuel is best known for her role as the screen wife of Mel Gibson in the 1979 film Mad Max. Prior to Mad Max, she appeared in TV police shows Matlock Police and Homicide. She was also a regular cast member in soap operas Class of ’74, The Young Doctors and Skyways, as well as guest staring in the comedy hit Hey Dad! and as Jeanette Taylor in All Saints.

More recently, Jo appeared in the ABC TV series Rake and directed her first feature film THE FIVE. A childrens adventure. Jo is a long-time advocate for children’s arts education and has taught youth drama in the Blue Mountains since 1999.

Producer / Cinematographer Nick A’Hern

Nick started his film and television career in 1987 by producing a range of educational programs for the “How To” market. Since this time, Nick has focused mainly on lifestyle and documentary content including two documentaries that were sold to the BBC and one that sold to the ABC and History Channel. Nick has spent the last number of years shooting, directing and producing a full length feature film The Ninth Order as well as editing 2 x 90 minute documentaries.

Director - Russell Tredinnick

​Russell Tredinnick is passionate about all aspects of the Performing Arts and about working with young actors, singers, dancers and musicians to tell stories, particularly Australian stories. Russell was a teacher at Blue Mountains Grammar School for 23 years. The last 6 of those was as teacher of the Years 5 and 6 Performing Class.Over the last two decades, he has composed and written for, directed and musically directed, a number of different choirs, theatre groups, Theatresports teams, dance troupes and Musical theatre productions,

Director - Jane Townsend

​Jane Townsend has been a professional theatre actor for over 25 years. Jane’s theatre highlights include as Lady MacBeth in Shakespeare in the Park’s MacBeth; as Sarah/Jane in Speaking In Tongues for The Street Theatre; Reagan in King Lear and Mistress Page in The Merry Wives of Windsor for Shakespeare by the Sea.

Whilst studying for a BA in Performance from Theatre Nepean at UWS, with an honours year in theatre research, Jane co-founded Kulini Company, performing in many festivals around Australia and establishing cultural exchange performance programs with the Pitjantjatjara peoples of Central Australia.

Director - James Tredinnick

​James Tredinnick has always been passionate about stories. He loves hearing them, and he especially loves telling them. Add to this his love for music and it's little wonder he ended up in the world of Musical Theatre. Over the years he has worked with countless productions as a writer, composer, actor, singer, musician, musical director, and sometimes all of the above. And though the roles and responsibilities change, his love for the craft endures. As long as there are stories to tell, James will always be willing to tell them.

​

Writer & Producer - Peter McLeod

​Peter McLeod has been a professional writer since 2008 when he launched his first graphic novel at the inaugural Leeds Thought Bubble convention. Since then, he has turned his focus to filmmaking as a sought after writer and script doctor, writing for Arts and Minds Studio, the Yunnan Film Group, Benjamin Jon Media, and more. Peter still produces comic content as head writer for About Time Comics, heading up their popular Godsend, In-Flight Service, and Dreamer titles. Peter's first produced feature film, The Legend of the Five, is due in cinemas in 2020.