Audiobooks

Starship Troopers

In Robert A. Heinlein’s controversial Hugo Award-winning bestseller, a recruit of the future goes through the toughest boot camp in the Universe—and into battle against mankind’s most alarming enemy…

Task Force Hammer

From New York Times bestselling author Craig Alanson comes book seventeen in the Expeditionary Force series.

The Fall of the Third Temple

A girl traumatized by the murder of her tribe. A battle-worn woman who became the perfect machine for survival and the deadliest special operator on Earth. Now, with the entire world collapsing around her and safety–and Alpha Team–10,000 miles away… Strap in for the opening salvo of the ARISEN: Operators epic—the biggest and most explosive ARISEN adventure yet and the untold story of the pipe-hitting operators of the Unified Special Operations Command during the first two years of the Zulu Alpha.

Wayward Earth

This prequel to Wayward Galaxy begins as the world ends…The colony ship Boone has launched for the planet Amir. Two more ships, hidden in a secret base in Africa, hasten their own plans to leave Earth as global war spirals toward a terminal doomsday. The world is ending, but Jack Hughes still has a job to do.

Recon

From New York Times bestselling author Craig Alanson comes book four in the Convergence series, melding action-packed urban fantasy with his signature humor.

Arisen Omnibus: Volume 2

ARISEN Omnibus: Volume 2 contains madness, mayhem, and heart-stopping heroism, including: Book 4, Maximum Violence, Book 5, Exodus, and Book 6, The Horizon.

Point Nemo

Point Nemo by New York Times and #1 Audible bestselling author Jeremy Robinson is a chilling journey into the unknown, a tale of sacrifice and survival that blurs the line between science fiction and horror. It’s a testament to the lengths a parent will go to protect their child and a stark reminder of our fragile place in the universe.on goes here

Fugitive

Fugitive is the epic finale of the Wasteland series from the bestselling author of After it Happened, Devon C. Ford. Perfect for fans of the Fallout games, Bobby Adair, and T.W. Piperbrook.

Nemesis

New York Times and #1 Audible bestselling author, Jeremy Robinson, explores an alternate reality in which the events of Project Nemesis, soon to be a TV series from Chad Stahelski (director of John Wick 1-4) and Sony Pictures Television, played out very differently, creating a horrific and thrilling new world where sacrifice and vengeance are part of everyday life.

Expeditionary Force 16: Aftermath

Expeditionary Force returns with book 16 in the series, Aftermath, from New York Times bestselling author Craig Alanson.

Arisen: Raiders 4: Duty

What do you do when everyone you trust to keep you alive wants you dead? When the only man who can stay back and hold the line is the one nobody can do without? And when the one thing that can keep all the survivors alive is going to get everyone killed? Welcome to the darkest night of the Zulu Alpha, where every loyalty is tested, every moral calculus impossible, and every price paid too costly to be borne.

Ruins of the Earth 4: Decayed Legacy

A chance to save millions. An enemy hellbent on stopping it. And one team tasked with the impossible. In the wake of defeating Gornath of the Ontishog, above the streets of Manhattan, and saving Earth from a devastating plague, Wic and Phantom Team believe their work is done. But Major Insarka Kindesh has other plans for the heroes and invites them back to Karkin Four. Will Phantom Team find a way to return countless human refugees to Earth? And will Sir Charles avoid being tossed into a bucket of flounder? Or will Wic and his heroic team of operators finally meet their end at the hands of the cruelest aliens the universe has ever faced?

The Tyr 2: Ordeal

The human invaders will have the Tyr’s planet. No mercy. No survivors. The corporation continues to grind the Tyr into dust against an enemy they can barely comprehend. With cities under siege and their armies shattered, the Tyr must find a way to fight back or be doomed to extinction. The Tyr: Ordeal is the thrilling next book of The Tyr Trilogy, a first contact space opera series from the bestselling author that brought you The Ember War and The Exiled Fleet.

Convergence 3: First Strike

Kaz Wolfe is trying to prevent ancient gods from regaining access to our world. The Order wants to open a portal to the Nether to gain power by serving those gods. Playing defense isn’t working. The Order always has the initiative. It’s time for direct action, to hit the Order hard. Before it’s too late for us.

Mountain Man 7: Skull Road

A lone survivor embarks on a post-apocalyptic quest for revenge in the seventh installment of this gritty zombie-thriller series. Combining dystopian suspense and zombie-killing action with complex characters and dark humor, Skull Road is the seventh book in Keith C. Blackmore’s thrilling Mountain Man series—perfect for fans of HBO’s The Last of Us.

Wayward Galaxy 6

There’s no such thing as peace on Amir…but as long as the uneasy truce between the Osay colonists and the last of the RUPAC station directors endures, one thing is certain: Brody is bored to death. While the eccentric, action-movie-worshipping battle android does his best to stay occupied, Reach and the colonists contemplate whether to help a mysterious faction inside the RUPAC stronghold. The enemy colonists desire liberty, but is Amir willing to go to war to bring it to them? Obviously.

Convergence 2: Dragonslayer

The enemy unknowingly opened a portal to the Netherworld, and our world’s only wizard somehow managed to close it. Unfortunately, something got through. Something big. A dragon. Now Kaz Wolfe, with help from his dog Duke who is channeling the spirit of a wizard from ancient Babylon, and with no help from Azib the Cowardly Genie, must find the dragon before someone gets a cellphone video of the thing, and the world learns that magic is real. Or, you know, before the dragon eats someone.

The Hidden Space

The Visitors have departed, but why did the Glass appear in the first place?

The Hidden Space is the continuation of the epic series, The Glass from Nathan Hystad, the author of Lost Contact, The Event, and Final Days.

KTF Part 2

KTF Part Two marks the end of Galaxy’s Edge: Season Two, and of the expansive story arc that began long ago with Legionnaire. Listen with caution, for here is where the characters you have come to know and love will meet their ultimate fates.

Includes a special notes from the authors.

Ruins of the Galaxy 6: Imminent Failure

*The Ruins of the Galaxy series is now performed by Christopher Ryan Grant, narrator of the bestselling sci-fi series Strange Company.

Three fleets aim to wipe out a planet. One team must raise the alarm...and time is running out.

Singularity

Singularity is the final book in Robinson’s epic Infinite Timeline, bringing together favorite characters from a vast world of standalone novels in a massive crossover that wraps up a 1.3-million-word saga. Start listening and bear witness to a conflict that might just spill over into the realm we call reality.

Hell Divers X: Fallout

Much is lost, but hope in one man remains . . . In a shocking betrayal, Captain Rolo has vaporized the supercarrier Immortal with a nuclear warhead, all but wiping out the Vanguard army. Little does he know that King Xavier and the surviving Hell Diver and Cazador teams from Brisbane were not aboard.

Arisen: Raiders 3: Dead Men Walking

Two teams of special-operations Marines. A tribe knit tight as steel cable. One Special Amphibious Reconnaissance Corpsman, struggling to find his place and keep the others alive. And everything at the end of the world exploding spectacularly at all times...

Brotherhood, sacrifice, survival; dead men walking. But hope never dies. ARISEN.

Wayward Galaxy 5

N-number Five is Alive! Peace and a secure future are within the grasp of the Rangers and Osay colonists…if they can withstand the coming Reclamation Fleet.

Warm up the VCR, pop in a mixtape in your Walkman and get ready to jump back into the action-heavy rollicking fifth adventure in the international hit series Wayward Galaxy from USA Today bestselling authors J.N. Chaney and Jason Anspach, performed by award-winning narrator R.C. Bray.

Expeditionary Force 15: Failure Mode

When a mission ends in disaster—there is no way to achieve the objective, no way to regroup and try again, no plan B, no hope—all you can do is fall back into FAILURE MODE and try to salvage whatever you can.

...if it is even possible to save anything, or anyone.

Commune 5

The hit Commune Series is back with book five! Rejoin some of your old favorites and plenty of unforgettable new ones on another deadly romp through post-apocalyptic America.

Khaos

With his unique brand of madness, New York Times and #1 Audible bestseller Jeremy Robinson descends into the underworld and puts a new spin on Greek mythology. Laying the final puzzle piece for the Infinite Timeline, Khaos is an epic crossover novel that is equal parts character, myth, humor, and poetic action.

The Other Place

When a mysterious invisible barrier appears on a Montana ranch, no one knows what to think of it.

The Other Place is an epic post-apocalyptic science fiction tale from the best-selling author of Lost Contact and First Life, brought to you in audio format by award-winning narrator R.C. Bray.