Dell Inc. (NasdaqGS:DELL) signed a definitive agreement to acquire SonicWALL, Inc. from Bay Partners, Thoma Bravo Fund IX L.P. fund of Thoma Bravo, LLC, Prospect Capital Corporation (NasdaqGS: PSEC) managed by Prospect Capital Management LLC, Teachers' Private Capital and others in cash on March 13, 2012. Dell will fund the deal with some $16 billion in cash. SonicWALL, Inc. reported revenues of approximately $260 million for year ended 2011. The transaction was approved by the Board of Directors of Dell Inc. and SonicWALL, Inc. The transaction remains subject to customary conditions and is expected to close in the second quarter of 2013. As of April 5, 2012, the transaction received clearance of antitrust concerns under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act. Robert Finkel, Jane Ross, Arthur Hazlitt, Domnick Bozzetti, Colin Greenspon and Margaret Keane of Dewey & LeBoeuf LLP acted as legal advisors to Dell, Inc. Gerald Nowak, Bradley Reed, Corey Baird and Corey Fox of Kirkland & Ellis LLP acted as legal advisors to SonicWALL, Inc. Michael Aiello and Garrett Charon of Weil, Gotshal & Manges acted as legal advisors to Teachers' Private Capital. David St. Jean and David Handler of Centerview Partners LLC acted as financial advisors to SonicWALL, Inc. and Thoma Bravo. Kirkland & Ellis LLP acted as legal advisors to Thoma Bravo and Teachers' Private Capital. Vinson & Elkins LLP acted legal advisor to Dell. Megan Muir, Anthony Kappus, Rachel Perkins, Kevin Criddle and Mimi Hunter of DLA Piper acted as legal advisors for SonicWALL. Dell Inc. (NasdaqGS:DELL) completed the acquisition of SonicWALL, Inc. from Bay Partners, Thoma Bravo Fund IX L.P. fund of Thoma Bravo, LLC, Prospect Capital Corporation (NasdaqGS: PSEC) managed by Prospect Capital Management LLC, Teachers' Private Capital and others on May 9, 2012. Dell expects the transaction to be accretive to earnings on a non-GAAP basis in the second half of this year. Subsequent to May 4, 2012, Dell completed its acquisitions of SonicWALL Inc., Wyse Technology, Inc., and Make Technologies Inc. The total estimated purchase price for all of the outstanding shares for all of these acquisitions, which primarily consists of SonicWALL and Wyse Technology, was $2.2 billion.