SAP is the leading company in enterprise application software, with headquarters in Walldorf, Germany. SAP stands for “Systems, Applications, and Products in Data Processing” was founded in 1972 and has a long history of innovation and growth as a true industry leader. SAP solutions and services help over 253,500 customers around the world to operate financially, adapt continuously, and develop sustainably. SAP has more than 66,500 workers and sales & development offices in more than 130 countries.

SAP SE creates enterprise software to manage business operations and customer relationships. The company is particularly well-known for its ERP software. SAP is the world’s third-biggest publicly traded software corporation by revenue, the highest non-software corporation in the world, and the largest German firm by market valuation. In addition to ERP software, the company sells database software and technology, cloud engineered systems, and enterprise software products such as human capital management software, product lifecycle management software, enterprise performance management and customer relationship management software, supplier relationship management software, and supply chain management software.

Now onto more interestings facts about SAP’s inspiring journey of 50 years of business

SAP even from the start was aiming to Build on the vision of “real-time” computing: system that processes data as customers need something than in batches overnight.SAP Systemanalyse und Programmentwicklung (“System Analysis and Program Development”).is founded by five former IBM personnel (Dietmar Hopp, Hasso Plattner, Hans-Werner Hector, Klaus Tschira, and Claus Wellenreuther) in 1972.They had the taste of success in real time data processing.SAP employed nine people and generated DM 620,000 in revenue by the end of its first year in business. These developments in the first year mostly took place at night and on weekends.The corporation established its headquarters in Weinheim, Germany, and opened an office in adjacent Mannheim, taking the approach of a private partnership under the German Civil Code. However, SAP’s five founders spent the most of their time at the data centres of their initial customers, which included Imperial Chemical Industries’ German office in Stringen.By 1973,SAP has finished its first financial accounting system, RF. This system is the foundation for the continued development of other software modules for the system, which will eventually be known as SAP R/1SAP software was being used by more clients in southwest Germany, notably the tobacco manufacturer Rothändle in Lahr and the pharmaceutical firm Knoll in Ludwigshafen. Meanwhile, SAP ran on IBM servers with the DOS operating system.SAP exhibited its adaptability for the first time when it converted its RF system from DOS to OS over an eight-week timeframe.SAP had a roster of 40 reference customers in 1974, after only two and a half years in business.

It’s 1975, and companies may now use SAP’s RM system to handle purchasing, inventory control, and invoice verification. The unification of all of the industry’s applications becomes a SAP trademark. Materials management data is instantly transferred into financial reporting on a value basis, and invoice validation and posting can be done in a single step.As a sales and support subsidiary, SAP GmbH Systeme, Anwendungen und Produkte in der Datenverarbeitung is created in 1976. After five years, the limited partnership is dissolved, and its assets are transferred to SAP GmbH.

SAP and its 25 workers create DM 3.81 million in sales, ensuring the company’s continued development.

Relocation occurred in 1978,SAP relocated its headquarters from Central European to Walldorf. For the first time, the business began deploying its technology for consumers outside of Germany. Two Austrian enterprises are trying to establish SAP software. SAP’s restructure boosts active sales.For the first time, SAP commences operations on one’s own server, Siemens 7738. Until now, its staff’s development activities have been spread throughout regional customers’ data centres, including ICI, Thermal, Knoll, Grünzweig Hartmann, and Freudenberg.

SAP’s first data centre is still in rented space, but the business has already started ground on the beginning development of its own facility.

Changes in technology

A thorough evaluation of IBM’s databases and dialogue control system prompts SAP to reconsider its software, laying the groundwork for SAP R/2.

During the 1980s, SAP establishes its first location on Max-Planck-Strasse in the Walldorf business estate. Its development area, which now has 50 computer screens, is finally integrated under one roof. SAP software are being upgraded. SAP expands its data-processing infrastructures by combining its current Siemens 7738 with just an IBM/370-148, which it upgrades the following year with a more powerful IBM 4341. This variant has 4MB of RAM. SAP’s expansion continues. SAP adds RV, a customized development for sales and distribution, to its product offering.

Claus Wellenreuther, one of SAP’s founding members, has left the business.

SAP not only had a massive growth in its technological developments and expansion, it has its key contribution in philanthropy and hiring of people with special challenges.SAP has given millions of dollars to several global health causes, including the Project Red campaign and the Multilateral Investment guarantee agency. Furthermore, as part of an effort to build new markets in South Africa, SAP has released free software. The organisation also encourages its employees to volunteer by deploying huge teams to different nations to help non-profits through social sabbaticals. Volunteering by SAP personnel has taken place in China, India, Brazil, and South Africa.SAP also conducts outreach programmes within the organisation. The corporation initiated a push in 2013 to hire autistic people and Asperger syndrome, emphasising their underappreciated capacity to contribute to the workforce. By 2020, SAP hopes to have 1% of their workforce composed of people with autism.