The extraordinary ambiance of Mannheim Palace and its adjacent buildings offers an ideal space for an outstanding educational experience: The facilities, such as the libraries and the IT infrastructure, meet the very highest standards. Everything is within close proximity – both on the campus itself and in the neighboring city center, with its rich variety of shopping and cultural offerings.

The University of Mannheim itself, of course, also has much to offer: the wide range of sporting activities; the university choir, orchestra and various theater groups invite participants to join in the fun; and countless initiatives and groups formed by students give participants the opportunity to get involved. And naturally, there's no shortage of nightlife: The parties at legendary Schneckenhof or in the catacombs of the palace are well-known and popular throughout the region.

Mannheim is at the heart of the German and European economy and is regarded as the birthplace of many world-changing ideas. Indeed, the first bicycle, the car and the first rocket-powered aircraft were invented in the city. 50% of the most important German companies are located within a 250-kilometer radius of Mannheim. Global leaders such as BASF and SAP are headquartered in the Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region, whose center is Mannheim. The financial capital of Frankfurt, like Stuttgart, the center of the German automotive industry, are just a short trip away by car or train.

The economic success of the Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region is associated with an outstanding scientific environment. The University of Heidelberg, for instance, enjoys a strong global reputation in the field of medicine, and the University of Mannheim is one of the top institutions in Europe in business and economics-related fields. The quality of the 21 universities with just under 83,000 students and numerous other research institutes makes the region a leading cradle of innovation.

In addition to its dynamic economy and world-class research, the region combines a high quality of life, rich in history and culture. Residents and visitors alike enjoy the beautiful landscape as well as the cultural, culinary and sporting delights of a region rich in opportunities.

Please find further information on the Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region here