We are delighted to announce that we will be offering three weeks of in-person writing camp in addition to three weeks of virtual camp, plus a summer-long virtual program for teens. We hope this helps all of our families find a Spells camp experience that fits their family’s needs. Regardless of format, all of our camp weeks will include the same irreverent writing workshops, small group sessions, and individualized writing help from Spells staff and interns.

IN-PERSON CAMP for ages 7–12

July 6-9, Writing Games: Join us for a week of writing wordplay as we experiment with different types of storytelling games and prompts, then invent our own products for battling writer’s block or encouraging creative play!

July 12-16, Musical Madness: Welcome all aspiring musicians and fans of musical theater to a jazzy week of songwriting and storytelling, as we work together on the libretto for our own Broadway smash hit!

August 2-6, Get a Clue!: Spells Writing Lab has become a crime scene—can you help us solve this whodunit? Our junior detectives will experiment with forensic science and other investigative techniques as we learn about the elements of a good mystery story, from creating strong characters to revealing clues.

VIRTUAL CAMP for ages 7–12

July 19-23, The Time Machine: Dr. Spells and his malfunctioning time machine are stuck bouncing around the time-space continuum, and we have to save him! During this virtual camp week, we’ll “visit” a wide variety of times & places and use these flights of fancy to inspire temporal-themed stories.

July 26-30, Superhero Scoop: What is that, there in the sky? It’s a bird! No, it’s a plane! No—it’s Super Spells, presiding over this great metropolis in the name of justice! Work with us during this virtual camp week, tackling real-life journalistic writing techniques to document the next breaking news story: a superhero as fantastic as you can imagine.

August 9-13, The Play’s the Thing: It’s been so long since we’ve all been able to go to the theatre—so we thought, “Why not bring the theatre into our homes?” Join us for this very special virtual week of camp as we create, produce, and perform in our very own short plays—online!

VIRTUAL SUMMER PROGRAM for ages 12+

Broadway, Hollywood, and Beyond: Scriptwriting for Teens.

Are you a teen interested in writing for television, film, or theatre? Join us for this year’s six-week Spells Writing Lab summer program for ages 12+, in which you will learn the fundamentals of scriptwriting—which you can then apply to writing your own short film, TV spec script, or short play!

Our teen campers will be meeting virtually on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 2–3:30pm from July 6 through August 12 for writing workshops, online author visits, and writer’s circle feedback as they work on scripts over the summer.