Camp Registration includes all required camp materials, a camp t-shirt, certificate and anthology of student work

Elementary Morning Camp Session 1:

2024 THEME: Superheroes

Join us for a deep dive into the powerful world of superheroes. We will take a look at literary superheroes and real-life superheroes. Join us as we explore a variety of writing genres to discuss the superhero world.

Monday, June 17 through Friday, June 28, 2024 (closed June 19); 8:30 am to 12:00 pm; TAMU-CC campus.

Elementary Morning Camp Session 2:

2024 THEME: Zoo Adventures

Take a walk on the wild side and delve deep into the various genres of writing. Campers will get to experience various activities and presenters revolving around zoo life and animals ranging from play writing to poem creating. Come join us for a wild time!

Monday, June 17 through Friday, June 28, 2024 (closed June 19); 8:30 am to 12:00 pm; TAMU-CC campus, O'Connor Building.

Middle School Camp Session 1: (FULL)

2024 THEME: Space Out with Extraterrestrials at Sci-Fi Writing Base Camp

Explore the various worlds of sci-fi and dystopia writing. From alternate societies to deep space and battling technology. Campers will have an out of this world experience looking at writings from authors such as Isaac Asimov, Ray Bradbury, Margaret Peterson Haddix, Kristy Acevedo, and many more. Campers will also take a deep dive and discover the elements and characteristics of science fiction and dystopia writing. Take flight and blast off to space at the 2024 TAMU-CC Young Authors Camp!

Monday, June 17 through Friday, June 21 (closed June 19); 8:30 am to 4:00 pm; TAMU-CC campus, O'Connor Building.

Middle School Camp Session 2:

2024 THEME: Blaaarrrggghhh, Raauuughhh, Uuugghhh, BRAAAINS!Warning! Caution! Beware of zombies! Can you survive the zombie poetry apocalypse? Catch a thrill and explore the various genres and elements of zombie fiction. Take an adventure and write your own zombie tale at the 2024 TAMUCC Young Authors Camp!

Monday, June 24 through Friday, June 28; 8:30 am to 4:00 pm; TAMU-CC campus, O'Connor Building.

What about lunch?

Campers are encouraged to bring a sack lunch that does not require refrigeration.

Where are camps held?

Camps are held on the Texas A&M-Corpus Christi university campus in the O'Connor Building on Seagull Lane (see campus map).

Reminder: Bring water jug and cap; apply sunscreen and mosquito repellent before coming to camp (we will not apply).

Click Here for a Downloadable Campus Map

Writers' Island Workshop

The workshop is designed to provide high school writers with opportunities to expand their interest in writing and to experience a professional style writer's workshop. This annual Writers' Island Workshop will include a variety of writing activities as well as visits with poets and artists and nature walks. Each author will receive camp material and a t-shirt. The camp staff consists of a team of university professors, high school teachers, and university students.

2024 THEME- Utopias & Dystopias

Explore humanities' construction and deconstruction of society as we compare, contrast, and collide these two opposing worlds. Writers will deep-dive into their imagination to create poetry and short stories surrounding the inter-dimensions of these fictional (or realistic?) societies.

Monday, June 24 through Friday, June 28; 8:30 am to 4:00 pm; TAMU-CC campus, O'Connor Building.

What about lunch?

Campers are encouraged to bring a sack lunch that does not require refrigeration.

Where are camps held?

Camp will be held on the TAMU-CC campus in the O'Connor Building on Seagull Lane.

Click here for a downloadable campus map.

Reminder: Bring water jug and cap; apply sunscreen and mosquito repellent before coming to camp (we will not apply).