Dates Camp June 16 - July 6, 2024 Writer's Camp plus Production Camp June 22 - July 6, 2024 Production Camp

The one week Writers’ Camp prior to Production Camp will contain 2 tracks: Scriptwriting Track for campers who want to write the script for the original production; Music writing Track for campers who want to write original music and select other music to be performed during the original production. Production campers will spend two weeks participating in auditions, practices, and various theatre classes provided by experienced theatre instructors. At the conclusion of Production Camp, two productions are performed for live audiences in Lee Hall Auditorium on the Mississippi State University campus. Students spend their down time on Mississippi State’s campus led by a team of experienced residence staff.

Participants enrolled are involved in the one-week Writers’ Camp which precedes the two-week Production Camp. It is designed to write and create their own original musical comedy to perform with the help of professional theatre staff, writers, and musicians. All students begin the creative process together and then are split up into their designated tracks. Two tracks, scriptwriting, and songwriting are available from which students to choose based on their interests.

Scriptwriting Track (limited to 15 participants)

The scriptwriting track focuses on writing the overall story, characters, and dialogue of the production. Students work together to develop writing skills and storytelling with the help of experienced theatre teachers and writers. Students will learn the intricacies of script development from start to finish and see their production on stage!

Applicants are required to submit an original short story or play (at least 1200 words)

Music Composition Track (limited to 9 participants)

Applicants are required to submit lyrics for an original song, a recording of that song, and a recommendation from a teacher/professional performing artist verifying the The SongWriting track of summer Scholars On-Stage is an opportunity for students to compose original show music and character songs for the cast of each production. Professional musicians teach our students ways to write and produce their own original songs in music-writing teams of three or four. If you love to write songs and compose music, this is the track for you.

Applicants are required to submit lyrics for an original song, a recording of that song, and a recommendation from a music teacher or director of an event in which you were a singer or a song composed by you was performed