A course or camp for every writer!

Over the past 35 years our youth programs have grown to include in person camps and courses for those entering 3rd through 12th grades, remote writing courses and international camp partnerships. We truly have a fit for every writer.

Sponsored by the Bay Area Writing Project at UC Berkeley, our camps offer kids and teens a unique opportunity to develop their creative abilities and writing talents. Instructors are highly experienced classroom teachers who serve as BAWP Teacher-Consultants and who make it their goal to instill in each camper an appreciation, excitement and enjoyment of writing.

Explore our camp website (bawpwritingcamp.org) for a list of all our current and upcoming offerings.

Young Writers Camps (rising 3rd through 9th)

Our Young Writers Camps offer a relaxed atmosphere where campers will receive specific writing instruction and conference individually with teachers to build and reinforce their writing skills. The camps are for students who like to write! They are not remedial writing camps. Students will have time to explore their writing interests, discover their strengths, and learn more about the craft of writing. The camps provide in-depth writing instruction, extended periods of writing time, flexibility in writing assignments, and daily time to share writing with peers.

High School Writing Courses (rising 9th - 12th Graders)

This summer, join us for our High School Writing Courses, unique writing classes held at UC Berkeley. There is always something for everyone; from a 4-week genre mash-up course to 1-week courses that focus on popular topics like Journalism. You will be able to explore your interests, discover your strengths and take writing risks that you might not be able to in a traditional classroom setting.

International Partnerships

BAWP is always looking for ways to work with students and teachers outside the Bay Area.

Partnerships on hold:

ULink (ISS-ULink): In an exciting partnership by the Bay Area Writing Project, and International Schools Services and ULink (ISS-ULink), BAWP is holding Youth Writing Camps in Guangdong, China. Created for Chinese national students, the camps offer Chinese students highly interactive, creative and challenging classes in a carefully structured environment for English language learners.

WFCC International Program: This summer BAWP will be partnering with CFM Educational Services to provide a rigorous 4-week writing program, Writing Foundation for College & Career, for visiting International students.

Please submit inquiries about this program to:

CFM Educational Services

Email: cfm@cfmedu.com

Third Classroom and The Bay Area Writing Project: BAWP and Third Classroom will provide a 12-hour, six-session online course on composing an effective argument for delivering a persuasive speech on a topic of individual student interest.