Flexibility and Balance: Bringing Your Whole Self to City Leadership

When the pandemic struck during his second year in office, Shreveport Mayor Adrian Perkins learned important lessons about staying flexible.

Shrink Your Security Blind Spots

Just as drivers have to contend with blind spots on the road, so do security practitioners and leaders defending their networks.

6 Tips for Responding to Crisis

If the recent pandemic has taught government organizations anything, it’s that resiliency and crisis management always need to be top of mind.

The Essential Role of Location in Public Health Preparedness

We can all recognize that the role geography plays in executing an effective public health response is critical. Understanding how to apply location-based thinking enhances preparedness and response efforts.

3 Ways DevSecOps Can Improve Cybersecurity Practices

As much as agencies want and need to rapidly respond to change, they’re only as agile as the systems they rely on.

How Application Performance Management Enhances End User Experience

Using APM, your application team can monitor the end user experience of cloud, web or enterprise mobile apps running on physical, virtual or mobile devices.

Finding the Right Foundation for Your Agency’s IT Modernization

In their rush to realize IT modernization’s promises of more security, better service delivery and greater innovation, agencies find three main challenges — and a solution — to find the right foundation.

Solving Data Challenges with Network-Attached Storage

The huge and diverse data workloads that government handles pose challenges to IT staff and agency leads in the form of siloed data, volume of data and mobility and regulatory risks.

How to Move Forward With IT Optimization at Your Agency

To successfully move forward with IT optimization, your agency needs to focus on three areas: IT automation, infrastructure and storage.

Calibrating Your Digital Risk in a Rapidly Evolving World

Agencies need a unified approach to managing digital risks to securely and efficiently operate in today’s digital environment.