Esri Congratulates

Partners of the Year!

Esri would like to acknowledge the dedication and commitment of our more than 1,000 Business partners who strive to help Esri bring the best GIS technology to our users. The continued support of Esri Business partners has enabled Esri to become what we are today, the world's leading provider of GIS software.

This year at the 2000 Worldwide Business Partner Conference 41 international and domestic companies were honored for their excellence and accomplishments as Business partners. Awards were given in the following categories:

Partners of the Year recognizes partners who have teamed with Esri successfully on a project, worked well with the regional office or international distributor, brought Esri into a new market with their specialized knowledge and expertise, etc.

New Partners of the Year is the same as above but honors companies that have been an Esri partner for two years or less.

Foundation Partners of the Year recognizes partners that through hard work and dedication have consistently built a very strong, dependable relationship with Esri. These partners are one of the foundation blocks that Esri's strong Business Partner Program is built upon.

Partners of the Year

Bowne Management System, Inc. (Mineola, NY)

Urban Information Systems (San Diego, CA)

Geographic Technologies Group, Inc. (Goldsboro, NC)

CompassCom, Inc. (Englewood, CO)

Kadrmas, Lee & Jackson (Bismarck, ND)

Ascent GIS, Inc. (Spokane, WA)

Advanced Technology Solutions (Lancaster, PA)

Integrate, Inc. (Baton Rouge, LA)

Woolpert LLP (Dayton, OH)

Digital Engineering Corporation (Columbia, MD)

Land + Systems (Bremen, Germany)

Geographics SRL (Ferrara, Italy)

Hanslik Software Laboratories (Katowice, Poland)

New Partners of the Year

EnviroGraphics (Haddam, CT)

Cheetah Software Systems, Inc. (Westlake Village, CA)

Panda Consulting (Palm Gardens, FL)

Ternary Spatial Research, Inc. (Denver, CO)

Applied Data Consultants (Eau Claire, WI)

GeoData Services, Inc. (Missoula, MT)

Geo Decisions (Camp Hill, PA)

Durham & Associates, Inc. (Shreveport, LA)

Spatial Data Integrations, Inc. (Louisville, KY)

DataWorld, Inc. (Bethesda, MD)

Statistics Finland (Helsinki, Finland)

EDV Dr. Haller (Plauen, Germany)

Sistemi Territoriali (Pisa, Italy)

Centric, Public Sector Solutions (The Netherlands)

AMBISIG (Lisboa, Portugal)

Foundation Partners of the Year

Applied GIS, Inc. (Schenectady, NY)

VESTRA Resources, Inc. (Redding, CA)

SDS, Inc. (Franklin, TN)

Azteca Systems, Inc. (Sandy, UT)

Pro-West & Associates, Inc. (Walker, MN)

GeoNorth, Inc. (Anchorage, AK)

Mapping Technologies International, Inc. (Moorestown, NJ)

Geowarehouse (Dripping Springs, TX)

Magic (Cincinnati, OH)

Michael Baker, Jr., Inc. (Alexandria, VA)

Linnet Geomatics (Winnipeg, Canada)

WASY (Berlin, Germany)

Metria/Lantmateriet (Gavle, Sweden)

For more information on these and other Esri Business partners, please visit www.esri.com/partners.

ArcNews home page