Jacques Doillon's ''Vengeance d'une Femme'' (''A Woman's Revenge'') is described as being ''based loosely'' on Dostoyevsky's novella ''The Eternal Husband,'' which is said to be a classic.

The movie, which isn't, will be shown tonight at 9:45 and tomorrow at 6:15 P.M. at the New York Film Festival.

The French drama is about Cecile (Isabelle Huppert), the widow of Andre, and Suzy (Beatrice Dalle), Andre's former mistress, who meet a year after his death, but not by chance. Cecile seeks out Suzy in a Paris hotel to blame the younger woman for Andre's death. He was on his way to see Suzy when his car struck a tree.

It is further revealed that three years have passed since Suzy ran away from the flat she shared with Andre and Cecile. The widow now thinks of that period as a time of ''total happiness.''

Just what sort of menage they had is anybody's guess. Andre, for all of the fuss he has caused, seems to have been a nonentity. He also must have had a high tolerance for windy, self-absorbed talk, if what the audience hears is an indication of what went on before.

The widow's interest in Suzy looks almost lustful at times. ''I'd like to throw myself into your arms,'' she says early in the film. Later, she asks Suzy to spend the night with her, and Suzy does, though in another room. Cecile is clever and changeable of mood. She can't be trusted. Poor Suzy talks tough, but she is clearly the more vulnerable. The third participant in this parlor game is Stephan (Jean-Luis Murat), a good-looking, rather weak younger man who is in love with Cecile. He works at a center that treats people who have been tortured, which may be why he is at ease with the two women. Their delight is in torturing, and in being tortured by, each other.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.