BOULDER, CO--(Marketwire - May 5, 2009) - Rogue Wave Software, Inc., a Battery Ventures portfolio company, today announced that it has acquired Visual Numerics, Inc., a privately held advanced analytics software company based in Houston, Texas. For more than three decades, Visual Numerics has provided numerical analysis and visualization software solutions that help users understand complex data from a variety of sources and build business-critical applications. The company offers two product lines: the IMSL® Numerical Libraries for powerful mathematical and statistical analysis and the PV-WAVE® visual data analysis development environment. This acquisition complements the Rogue Wave product families of software development tools, components and frameworks by adding industry-leading advanced data analysis and visualization tools. According to IDC the market for advanced analytics tools grew 13% in 2007 and usage is expected to become much more pervasive. "For the past 38 years Visual Numerics has been a leader in advanced analytics. The addition of their rich suite of numerical libraries and data analysis tools, along with an exceptional team enhances Rogue Wave's leadership position in software development components and infrastructure," said Brian Pierce, CEO of Rogue Wave Software, Inc. The combination of these technologies with Rogue Wave® Hydra and SourcePro® C++ products will enable customers to deliver advanced analytics applications in scalable, distributed computing environments. This will enable high-throughput data analysis using lower cost, power-efficient multi- and many-core hardware. "We believe that the combination of technologies from these two companies will lead to exciting new application possibilities for our customers," said Phil Fraher, CEO of Visual Numerics. The acquisition adds to the list of Rogue Wave's worldwide clients with a well established business and customer base in North America, Europe and Asia. About Rogue Wave® Rogue Wave Software, Inc. is a Battery Ventures portfolio company and the leading provider of enterprise class C++ components and infrastructure that enable organizations to build and deploy high performance applications. Only Rogue Wave provides the most complete C++ technology stack including C++ components, UI components, Eclipse-based development, run-time infrastructure, and services. Today, thousands of organizations worldwide have chosen Rogue Wave. For more information go to www.roguewave.com. The Rogue Wave name and logo are registered trademarks of Rogue Wave Software, Inc. in the United States and other countries. All other company and product names mentioned may be trademarks of the companies with which they are associated. Eclipse is a trademark of the Eclipse Foundation, Inc.

Contact Information: Contact: Patrick Leonard Rogue Wave Software Phone: +1.303.545.3229 E-mail: