​Rogue Wave Software has been named a Leader by Forrester Research, Inc. in its new report, The Forrester Wave™: API Management Solutions, Q4 2018. Rogue Wave scored second-highest in the Current Offering category – which measures the relative strength of a vendor’s current API management offering – for the Akana API Platform.

In preparing the report, Forrester evaluated 15 API management vendors across 26 criteria, with the goal of helping application development and delivery professionals make the right buying decision.

Akana has particularly strong API security and policy capabilities and good breadth across most all of our evaluation criteria. Its API user portal is among the most configurable and extensible.

The Forrester Wave™: API Management Solutions, Q4 2018

“We are very proud to be recognized as a Leader in API management in this Forrester Wave evaluation,” says Ian Goldsmith, vice president of Akana product management at Rogue Wave Software. “Business leaders around the world rely on Forrester’s in-depth research and analysis to inform their strategic buying decisions. In our view, this high ranking reflects the investment we continue to make in the Akana product and the team.”

API management is a key capability for many large enterprises. API management solutions are designed to move data across internet protocols to accelerate the integration of applications, databases, processes, and people. Companies count on API management systems, like Akana, as a primary way to integrate their backend applications and databases to deliver better customer-facing digital applications, positively impacting the end-user experience.

The Forrester Wave™ research report highlights the importance of APIs and API management, stating, “API management is critical because APIs drive digital business.” According to the report, “Akana has particularly strong API security and policy capabilities and good breadth across most all of our evaluation criteria. Its API user portal is among the most configurable and extensible.”

“Akana’s configurable life-cycle framework continues to be a strong foundation for building mature support for a variety of federated API strategies and ecosystems. In addition, the solution’s licenses feature provides great flexibility to support different API ownership, visibility, and subscription models.”

Akana provides a secure, unified platform for API management that includes analytics to generate business insight from API traffic through configurable reports. Goldsmith says, “Our clients use Akana for a variety of mission-critical functions, from processing billions of dollars in transactions – including hotel reservations, online and mobile retail sales, and credit and debit card payments – to inventory management, supply chain integration, and more.”

Goldsmith elaborates on what separates Akana from other API management platforms. “Rogue Wave has a culture of continuous improvement, and since the company’s acquisition of Akana, we have invested heavily in raising the quality of the platform and our support services. Our customers know that in addition to getting powerful technology, working with Rogue Wave means they also get support from design to implementation and unparalleled expertise to help them reach their strategic goals.”

To learn more, read the full report.

About Rogue Wave Software

Rogue Wave helps thousands of global enterprise customers tackle the hardest and most complex issues in building, connecting, and securing applications. Since 1989, our platforms, tools, components, and support have been used across financial services, technology, healthcare, government, entertainment, and manufacturing, to deliver value and reduce risk. From API management, web and mobile, embeddable analytics, static and dynamic analysis to open source support, we have the software essentials to innovate with confidence.

Source: Rogue Wave Software