Where: a huge renovated area of cargo terminal at the Central Railway Station, right in the center of Kyiv.

“Ukraine WOW” is an opportunity to find out over 1000 interesting facts about Ukraine.

The large interactive exhibition is located in a huge renovated area of cargo terminal at the Central Railway Station, right in the center of Kyiv. An unusual for Ukraine way combination of VR, art installations, large scale infographics as well as rail engines, get into a carriage and feel traveling through Ukraine, have a bird view look of the most picturesque places, hear the sounds of Ukraine like wind of a seashore.

3 reasons to visit “Ukraine WOW”

To see unique exhibits.

The last self-portrait of Kazimir Malevich, sculpture of Alexander Archipenko, 10 of 14 letters of the “Ukrainian Alphabet” by Heorhiy Narbut, the first book published in Ukraine – “The Apostle” by Ivan Fedorov (1574), baroque Royal Doors (XVIII century), silver hryvnias of Kyivan Rus’, unique Ukrainian ceramics.

To do some travelling in virtual reality.

Take a trip through the endless Fishing Bridge, fly over the Synevyr Lake and the tract Cascades, see Kyiv from the top of the monumental sculpture Motherland (The Motherland monument is the highest monumental sculpture in Europe. Opened in 1981, it stands at a height of 102 meters), take a train ride in the driver’s cabin, walk around the restored Nevytske Castle and see inside the “Nine”, the largest blast furnace in Europe. Furthermore, to clean the compartment with the help of Kinect technology and make a voice-over for the cartoon about outstanding Ukrainians.

To see amazing installations.

The heart of Ukraine that beats faster when you’re around; hand-painted pink wagon where wishes and dreams find voices; wall of 100 kilograms of amber; installation of Ukrainian yin-yang – coal and salt; “Khata-Mazanka” house with reproduced drawings by primitivist-artist Polina Rayko; Tunnel of Love; the bottom of the Black Sea; bottomless cave, 12-meter diorama and more.

3 interesting facts about Ukraine

Ukraine is the largest country in Europe.

At 233,013 square miles, Ukraine is 2,000 square miles larger than mainland France, 50,000 square miles larger than Spain, and 200,000 square miles larger than Germany.

Ukrainian civilizations date back to 4800 B.C.

The Trypillian and Scythian civilizations thrived in the land where Ukraine is today. At their peak in the 7th century B.C., the Scythians actively traded with civilizations in lands as far away as China, Persia, Egypt, and Greece.

Ukraine’s ties to Western Europe span more than a 1,000 years.

The daughter of Grand Prince Yaroslav, Anna, became the Queen Consort of France in 1051. Anna was highly educated and introduced Eastern culture to the Franks, paving the way for relationships between medieval Ukraine and Western Europe for centuries.

Exhibition website: http://ukrainewow.com