The second-largest city in Navarre, Tudela is known for its imposing architecture. It’s also a wonderful destination for keen foodies and wine aficionados eager to sample the region’s top produce. Accommodation options range from simple B&Bs to striking boutique hotels, fit for a range of tastes and budgets. Whether you’re dreaming of a vineyard escape or an eco-hotel with a strong design focus, our Gurus have got you covered.

Explore central Tudela on foot, beginning at the Plaza de los Fueros, before admiring the enormous Gothic Cathedral, and peering at the Ebro River from Santa María Magdalena Church or the medieval Ebro Bridge. The Palace of the Marquis of San Adrián is widely regarded as the finest Renaissance palace in the region and well worth visiting, as is the Muñoz Sola Museum of Modern Art.

Keen hikers should walk from the old town to Cerro de Santa Bárbara for mesmerising views of the city, the river and the verdant market gardens. The 13th-century Monreal Tower also promises panoramic vistas of the surrounding countryside, and has an interesting museum detailing the city’s Jewish, Muslim and Christian roots. The city is surrounded by beautiful landscapes for hiking and mountain biking, as well as some excellent wineries, one of which is amongst the best places to stay in Tudela.

The Best Places to Stay in Tudela

For a Vineyard Escape

Pago de Cirsus offers a stunning hotel with 12 traditional yet luxurious bedrooms surrounded by vineyards. The hotel is part of an acclaimed winery, perfect for guests dreaming of private tours and tastings. The onsite restaurant specialises in regional fare, paired with estate-grown wines. Superb.

For Design-Led Luxury

Aire de Bardenas is a remote collection of ultra-modern cubist pods, each containing private rooms and suites. Minimalist rooms have white interiors, with pale wood and big outdoor tubs for stargazing. Surrounded by rolling cornfields and a national park, this is a terrific eco-escape for those seeking to combine outdoorsy explorations with an appreciation of bold design. The restaurant is excellent.

FOR AN APARTMENT OR HOLIDAY VILLA

If you'd prefer a self-catering option, we suggest that you visit our online partner Booking.com.

TRAVEL INFORMATION

Fly into Pamplona Airport, an hour by road or rail from Tudela. Many hotels will be happy to arrange an airport pick up in advance.

Navarre is wonderful for a road trip! Contact our online partner Rentalcars if you would like to hire a car.

Expect a warm year-round climate, with temperatures averaging at around 26°C - 30°C between April and September. You'll find fewer crowds outside the school holidays — and appealingly cooler weather — in April, May or late September.

STILL NOT SURE?