Worksheets /Social Studies /Chiang Kai-Shek Facts & Worksheets

Not ready to purchase a subscription? Click to download the free sample version Download sample

Table of Contents

Chiang Kai-Shek was a Chinese political and military figure who served as the head of state of the Chinese Nationalist government from 1928 to 1949 and spent five decades as the leader of the Kuomintang (Chinese Nationalist Party).

See the fact file below for more information on Chiang Kai-Shek, or you can download our 26-page Chiang Kai-Shek worksheet pack to utilize within the classroom or home environment.

Key Facts & Information

EARLY LIFE

In the coastal region of Zhejiang, Chiang was born into a family of farmers and moderately successful merchants.

He was born in Heqiao, a town in Yixing, Jiangsu, some 38 km southwest of the capital Wuxi and 10 km from the shores of Lake Tai, into a family of Wu Chinese speakers living in their ancestral home—a concept significant in Chinese society.

He was the first child of his father’s third wife, Wang Tsai-yu, a well-to-do family of salt merchants, and the third child and second son of his father, Chiang Chao-Tsung.

After his father died when he was eight years old, Chiang described his mother as the “embodiment of Confucian principles.” The young Chiang was motivated throughout his youth by the knowledge that he bore responsibility for the honorable family’s reputation. As a child, Chiang was considered naughty. He also developed an early interest in warfare at a young age.

Chiang caused a stir in his community by shaving off his queue, the customary hairstyle for men of the Qing dynasty, and having it sent home from school.

EDUCATION

Chiang was born when the Manchu-dominated Qing dynasty was unstable, indebted, and racked by civil wars, natural disasters, famines, uprisings, and military defeats.

When he initially went to Japan to seek a military career between April 1906 and later that year, he declared himself to have strong nationalistic sentiments and a desire to, among other things, “expel the Manchu Qing and to restore China.”

Chiang decided to enlist in the military. He started his military training in 1906 at the Baoding Military Academy when Japan devalued its yen and abandoned its bimetallic currency standard.

He left for Tokyo Shinbu Gakko, an Imperial Japanese Army Academy prep school for Chinese students, in 1907.

He was influenced by his countrymen there to support the revolt against the Han-dominated Chinese republic and the Manchu-dominated Qing dynasty.

His friendship with Chen Qimei led to him being invited to the Tongmenghui, an influential revolutionary fraternity at the time, in 1908.

Chiang finished his military education at Tokyo Shinbu Gakko and served in the Imperial Japanese Army from 1909 to 1911.

RETURN TO CHINA

Chiang made his way back to China in 1911, intending to take part in the Wuchang uprising. He fought in the Revolutionary Army as one of Chen Qimei’s senior lieutenants, leading a regiment in Shanghai for his friend and mentor.

In the early months of 1912, a dispute arose between Chen and Tao Chen-Chang, a prominent Revolutionary Alliance member who opposed both Sun Yat-Sen and Chen. Tao attempted to flee to a hospital to stop the fight from getting worse, but Chiang discovered him there.

Chiang’s friendship with Chen Qimei hinted at a connection to the criminal underworld in Shanghai (the Green Gang headed by Du Yuesheng and Huang Jinrong).

Chiang was observed by the Shanghai International Settlement police when he was in Shanghai, and they ultimately accused him of several offenses.

Chiang was never imprisoned, and these accusations were never the subject of a trial.

After the revolution was successful, Chiang joined the Nationalist Party, which later became the Kuomintang (KMT).

Like his KMT brethren, Chiang split his time between exile in Japan and the safe havens of the Shanghai International Settlement following Yuan Shikai’s overthrow of the Republican government and the futile Second Revolution in 1913.

Yuan Shikai’s assailants killed Chen Qimei on May 18, 1916.

Chiang then took over as the CRP’s Shanghai head after Chen. Sun Yat-Sen’s political career was at its lowest point because most of his former Revolutionary Alliance co-workers refused to join him in the Chinese Revolutionary Party.

CHIANG KAI SHEK AND THE KUOMINTANG

Sun Yat-Sen relocated his headquarters to Canton (now known as Guangzhou) in 1917, and Chiang followed in 1918. At this point, Sun was treated with complete disregard; lacking weapons and resources, he was swiftly expelled from Guangdong (a province of Canton) and sent back to Shanghai.

He was eventually repatriated to Guangdong in 1920 with the help of mercenaries. After Sun returned to Guangdong, a disagreement developed between Chen Jiongming, the governor of Guangdong, who wanted to create a federalist system using Guangdong as a model province, and Sun, who intended to use the KMT to unify China forcibly.

Chiang cared for Sun for about 50 days while he was there, winning his unflinching trust.

They ceased their assault on Chen on August 9 and boarded a British ship for Hong Kong before boarding a steamship bound for Shanghai.

Sun retook control of Guangdong early in 1923 with the help of the Comintern and Yunnan mercenaries.

In order to reform the KMT and unify China using the KMT, he established a revolutionary government. The same year, Sun sent Chiang to Moscow to conduct a three-month study of the Soviet political and military system.

Chiang traveled to Russia and had meetings with Leon Trotsky and other Soviet officials, but he immediately understood that the Russian political system was unsuitable for China. Later, Chiang sent his eldest son Ching-Kuo to Russia to pursue his studies.

Sun appointed Chiang Kai-shek commandant of the Whampoa Military Academy in 1924, where he eventually made Guangdong his home.

Chiang quit his employment after a month because he didn’t like Sun’s close ties to the Comintern, but he eventually returned at Sun’s request. During the early years at Whampoa, Chiang cultivated a cadre of young officers committed to the KMT and him.

Throughout his rise to power, Chiang benefited from being a member of the nationalist Tiandihui fraternity, to which Sun Yat-Sen belonged and remained a source of support.

On March 12, 1925, Sun Yat-Sen passed away, leaving the Kuomintang without a strong leader. Wang Jingwei, Liao Zhongkai, and Hu Hanmin competed for leadership positions.

But, Liao was murdered in August of the same year, and Hu was detained for having ties to the perpetrators.

CHIANG KAI SHEK’S RULE

Chiang’s party continued to be surrounded by “surrendered” warlords who maintained a fair amount of independence within their respective territories after seizing control of China.

On October 10, 1928, Chiang was appointed director of the State Council in addition to his previous posts, which is the equivalent of the country’s presidency.

Sun Yat-Sen’s proposal called for the Kuomintang (KMT) to rebuild China in three phases:

Military Rule

Political Tutelage

Constitutional Rule

Democracy was the KMT revolution’s ultimate goal, but it was deemed impossible in the divided situation of China.

In Sun Yat-Sen’s name, the period of what Chiang’s party called “political tutelage” was therefore initiated under his administration because the KMT had successfully carried out the first stage of the revolution by seizing power in 1928.

The government improved public health services, built railroads and highways, paid off debts, reformed the banking and monetary systems, tried to stabilize prices, increased industrial and agricultural productivity, and passed legislation to fight drug trafficking.

Throughout his reign, Chiang remained committed to eradicating the Communists. After collecting his forces in Jiangxi, Chiang led his army in battle against the recently established Chinese Soviet Republic.

Chiang’s Fifth Campaign effectively ringed the Chinese Red Army in 1934 with the assistance of foreign military consultants like Max Bauer and Alexander von Falkenhausen.

With advanced knowledge of a Nationalist onslaught, the Communists withdrew during the Long March, which saw Mao Zedong ascend from a lowly military official to the most influential figure in the Chinese Communist Party.

Chiang was a nationalist and a Confucianist, and he opposed the heresy of the May Fourth Movement.

He was driven by his sense of nationalism and thought that the large infusion of Western literature and ideas supported by the May Fourth Movement would not be advantageous to China. Additionally, he believed that some Western ideals were alien to the people of the country.

CONTEMPORARY PUBLIC PERCEPTION

The various perspectives on Chiang have made the man’s legacy the subject of contentious discussions. Chiang brought about Chinese unification by leading the victorious Northern Expedition against the Beiyang Warlords in 1927.

He was featured on Time magazine’s cover ten times due to his initial portrayal as the leader of China against a Japanese invasion, both before and after the attack on Pearl Harbor.

Chiang urged his countrymen to fight until the “bitter end” of their ultimate victory against Japan in 1945, even though China received less American assistance than Britain and the Soviet Union. As a result, China did not surrender.

Chiang’s popularity in Taiwan is now divided along political lines, with Kuomintang (KMT) followers giving him more support. He is generally despised by Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) voters and supporters, who blame him for the tens of thousands of fatalities during the February 28 Incident and his subsequent autocratic rule.

Chinese textbooks continue to criticize the KMT under Chiang for abandoning Sun Yat-Sen’s objectives by purging the country of communists. The nationalist army’s contributions to the war effort have been acknowledged since reform and opening. Still, the CCP insists it is the cornerstone of the Sino-Japanese War against the Japanese invasion.

DEATH AND LEGACY

Chiang Kai-Shek passed away in Taipei on April 5, 1975, 26 years after fleeing to Taiwan, at 87. Before his death, he had experienced a severe heart attack, pneumonia, and renal failure worsened by severe cardiac dysfunction.

The people of Taiwan wore black armbands throughout the stated month-long period of mourning. All feasts and celebrations were prohibited, and televisions were only broadcast in black and white.

On the mainland, however, there was no evidence of mourning following Chiang’s passing, and newspapers ran the headline, “Chiang Kai-Shek Has Died.”

As the anti-Communist leader who dedicated a significant portion of his life to the cause, Chiang Kai-Shek is well-known today. But his initial goal had been the modernization of China.

Unfortunately, these objectives were not met, and corruption crept into the party. Chiang’s ideals and goals included, as he frequently referred to, “establishment of a government of integrity,” “organization of the people’s army,” and “indemnify the rights of agricultural and industrial organizations.”

Chiang Kai-Shek Worksheets

This fantastic bundle includes everything you need to know about Chiang Kai-Shek across 26 in-depth pages. These ready-to-use worksheets are perfect for teaching kids about Chiang Kai-Shek, a Chinese political and military figure who served as the head of state of the Chinese Nationalist government from 1928 to 1949.

Complete List of Included Worksheets

Below is a list of all the worksheets included in this document.

Chiang Kai Shek Facts

Get to Know Me

Unleash the Meaning

#Survey

Picture Ready

A Leader Should Be…

Chiang and the Economy

Make it Alive

Chiang’s Skills

Chiang in Symbols

Primary Source Analysis

Frequently Asked Questions

Who was Chiang Kai-Shek?

Chiang Kai-Shek was a Chinese political and military leader who served as the leader of the Republic of China between 1928 and 1975.

What was Chiang Kai-Shek’s role in Chinese history?

Chiang Kai-Shek was a key figure in the Chinese Civil War, leading the Nationalist government against the Communist Party of China. He also served as the leader of the Republic of China, which ruled Taiwan and other territories after the Nationalists lost the civil war in 1949.

Where did Chiang Kai-Shek come from?

Chiang Kai-Shek was born in the town of Xikou, in the Fenghua district of the Zhejiang province, in China.

What were some of the things that Chiang Kai-shek did during his time in power?

Chiang Kai-Shek led the Republic of China in the Chinese Civil War, which was the conflict between the Nationalists and the Communist Party of China for control of China. He also oversaw the modernization and westernization of China and the establishment of Taiwan as a separate political entity from mainland China.

How did Chiang Kai-Shek die?

Chiang Kai-Shek died on April 5, 1975, in Taipei, Taiwan. He had suffered a heart attack. His death was followed by a period of mourning in Taiwan, where he was widely respected as a leader and father of the nation.

Link/cite this page

If you reference any of the content on this page on your own website, please use the code below to cite this page as the original source.

Link will appear as Chiang Kai-Shek Facts & Worksheets: https://kidskonnect.com - KidsKonnect, February 2, 2023

Use With Any Curriculum

These worksheets have been specifically designed for use with any international curriculum. You can use these worksheets as-is, or edit them using Google Slides to make them more specific to your own student ability levels and curriculum standards.