Chiang Kai-shek, also known as Jiang Jieshi or Jiang Zhongzheng (31 October 1887 – 4 February 1927) was a Chinese Nationalist politician, strategist, the most high-ranking military leader of the short-lived KMT government in Guangzhou, a close associate of Sun Yat-sen and, after the latter's death in 1925, of Wang Jingwei as well as main leader of the Northern Expedition in 1926/27, which evolved into a disaster for the Kuomintang forces and led to the defeat and assassination of Chiang in early 1927 and to the downfall of the Kuomintang as a whole.

History[]

Early life[]

Chiang was born on 31 October 1887 in Xikou, a town in Fenghua near the coastal city of Ningbo in the Chinese province of Zhejiang, to a family of local salt merchants. He lost his father when he was eight and young Chiang would become erratic and impertinent; In early 1906, at age 18, Chiang cut off his queue, the required hairstyle of men during the Qing Dynasty, and had it sent home from school, shocking the people of his hometown.

Chiang grew up at a time in which military defeats, natural disasters, famines, revolts, unequal treaties and civil wars had left the Manchu-dominated Qing dynasty deeply destabilized and in debt. In 1906, he was sent to the Baoding Military Academy near Beijing to pursue a military career, but only one year later he went to the Empire of Japan to enroll at a Japanese training program for Chinese students.

Early Revolutionary Activity[]

In Tokyo, he came under the influence of compatriots to support the revolutionary movement which aimed to overthrow the Manchu-dominated Qing dynasty and to set up a Han-dominated Chinese republic. Chiang evolved strong nationalistic feelings with a desire among other things to, 'expel the Manchu Qing and to restore China'.

He soon befriended Chen Qimei, who would later be a close associate of the famous Sun Yat-sen and was eventually killed by Zhang Zongchang in 1916, and was introduced to the Tongmenhui, an important revolutionary brotherhood and predecessor organization of the Kuomintang. Chiang graduated in 1909 and served in the Imperial Japanese Army until 1911. Around the same time, he started to use the name "Chiang Kai-shek" for the first time; Prior to that he was known by his school name, Jiang Zhiqing. His new name was mainly used as a pseudonym in several Chinese magazines he edited, like Voice of the Army (軍聲).

Xinhai Revolution[]

After learning of the Wuchang Uprising in 1911, which would trigger the Xinhai Revolution, Chiang returned to China in 1911, intending to fight as an artillery officer. He served in the revolutionary forces, leading a regiment in Shanghai under his friend and mentor Chen Qimei as one of Chen's chief lieutenants. During Chiang's time in Shanghai, the Shanghai International Settlement police observed him and eventually charged him with various felonies, but these charges never resulted in a trial. Chiang apparently also had contacts to the Green Gang, one of Shanghai's leading criminal syndicates.

Chiang became a founding member of the Nationalist Party (a forerunner of the KMT) after the success of the 1911 Revolution in February 1912. However, instead of transferring the power to the rebels, military commander Yuan Shikai instead seized power. The nationalists tried another revolution attempt in early 1913, the Second Revolution, but were crushed by Yuan's troops. While Sun Yat-sen fled to Japan, Chiang and Chen relocated to the Shanghai International Settlement.

After Chen Qimei's assassination in May 1916, Chiang would succeed him as leader of the Chinese Revolutionary Party bureau in Shanghai. Sun Yat-sen's political career reached its lowest point during this time - most of his old Revolutionary Alliance comrades refused to join him in the exiled Chinese Revolutionary Party. The following years would be a dark time for the Chinese nationalist revolutionary movement.

Guangzhou Government[]

In September 1917, Sun Yat-sen moved his base of operations to Guangzhou, after China had become increasingly more authoritarian, this time under the rule of Premier Duan Qirui, a former close a ally of the now deceased Yuan Shikai. A rival government would be established, supported by local warlords such as Tang Jiyao of Yunnan. Chiang would relocate to Gunagzhou as well in 1918. Ironically, Sun Yat-sen's new government was not based on the old Provisional Constitution; rather, it was de facto a military government and Sun its Generalissimo. This would soon cause tensions.

Many in Sun Yat-sen's Guangzhou government thought that his position as the Generalissimo was too exclusionary and promoted a cabinet system to challenge Sun's ultimate authority. Sun was once again side-lined by his political opponents and military strongmen and left for Shanghai, with the Guangzhou Military Government now headed by Cen Chunxuan, former associate of Sun, as chief executive. Even though Sun would be restored in Guangzhou with the support of Chen Jiongming, a known federalist, he was once again forced into exile in 1922. This time, Chiang accompanied Sun during his exile and provided shelter for Sun in Shanghai.

Sun regained control of Guangdong in early 1923, this time with the help of Kuomintang-aligned troops under Tang Jiyao and Li Zongren and financial support from the Commune of France. Undertaking a reform of the KMT, he established a revolutionary government and planned to subjugate the warlords in Beijing to finally unite China under one banner. Chiang was sent to Paris for a few months, meeting high ranking syndicalist politicians, but quickly came to the conclusion that the Western European model of government was not suitable for China. After his return to China, Sun appointed Chiang Commandant of the newly-established Whampoa Military Academy, where the KMT planned to prepare recruits for inevitable march northwards. The early years at Whampoa allowed Chiang to cultivate a cadre of young officers loyal both to the KMT and to himself.

Power Struggle within the KMT[]

Sun Yat-sen eventually died on 12 March 1925 from cancer; His death created a power vacuum within the Kuomintang leadership. Soon, a contest ensued among Wang Jingwei, Liao Zhongkai and Hu Hanmin. Liao Zhongkai was notably in favour of maintaining close relations with the Commune of France as well as the Chinese Syndicalist movement, which was strongly opposed by the KMT right wing under the lead of Hu Hanmin. Liao was nearly assassinated before a Kuomintang Executive Committee meeting on August 20; The KMT's left wing, dominated by Wang Jingwei, would seize the opportunity to purge high-ranking members of the right wing KMT, including Hu. In the direct aftermath, Wang Jingwei assumed the position of generalissimo and Chiang became commander of the KMT's military, while Liao Zhongkai became acting president of the Guangzhou KMT government.

Northern Expedition and assassination[]

In summer 1926, Chiang Kai-shek deemed the time right to attack the Zhili Clique which controlled most of eastern China. On July 9th, he gave a speech before 100,000 soldiers of the National Revolutionary Army announcing the commencement of the Northern Expedition. Thanks to years of buildup, organization, and assistance from French and former Soviet advisors, the NRA had become one of the most powerful fighting forces in China. During the first weeks of the offensive the NRA made rapid progress, surging towards its first objectives at Wuhan and Nanchang. In September the NRA quickly took Nanchang and two-thirds of the Wuhan conurbation, but Wuchang held out. Aiming to uphold its rights in China, and fearing the fall of China to revolutionary socialism, Germany began resupplying the city with food, triggering the famous Yangtze Incident. When the NRA attacked German gunboats to prevent this, the German Empire gained justification to intervene.