Birth

Avril Ramona Lavigne better known as "avril lavigne" was born in the province of Ontario in Canada in the city of Belleville.

Is a singer, songwriter, fashion designer and Canadian actress. Some media and critics since its inception call the princess of pop punk.

Let go

is the singer's debut album.

Lavigne had to deal with the conflicts of the musical direction of the album. He moved to Los Angeles, California and began recording material for the album, but the style of the music was not the type the label sought, and he had to rethink his vision of the album with the production team The Matrix.

Let go

The album was recognized as the biggest pop debut of 2002. It obtained mainly positive comments, although the composition of Lavigne had some criticism. Let Go was a six-time platinum record player in the United States and also had a good reception in Canada, where she obtained a diamond record.6 She also reached several platinum albums in different countries of the world, including the United Kingdom, where she became the soloist. Younger female in getting a number one album.

Achievements

Is the holder of the Guinness record as the youngest female singer to bring a debut album to the UK popularity charts, aged 18 and 106 days, as she was 18 weeks at number one on that list, with his album Let Go. This album was also in position 162 of the list of the best albums of the Rock Hall of Fame.

Under my skin

is the second album of the Canadian singer-songwriter.

In its first week of release, it reached the first place in the Billboard 200 albums. He also obtained this position in Australia and the United Kingdom.

According to Billboard Magazine, it ranked # 149 on the bestseller list of the 2000s, with more than 12 million copies to date. The album was certified with triple platinum disc by the RIAA.

Under my skin

Under My Skin presents an Avril more vulnerable, raw, and negative, in terms of its lyrics; musically it presents a darker vibe reminiscent of post-grunge and its songs are more melodic but at the same time more rocky. The majority of this album is co-produced by the Canadian singer Chantal Kreviazuk, as well as, with the collaboration of Evan Taubenfeld, Butch Walker and Ben Moody.

Only in 2004 it sold 6.4 million copies being the third best selling album of the year.

The best damm thing

It is the third studio album by the singer. It was the sixth best-selling album of the year, according to IFPI, being the third best selling album of the singer, after Let Go and Under My Skin.

Allmusic highlighted the album as one of the most significant punk pop of all time. As well as highlighted the single "Girlfriend", which became the first number 1 of Lavigne in the Billboard Hot 100.

Goodbye lullaby

Is the fourth studio album of the singer-songwriter.

It has sold 2 million copies worldwide since its launch.Having great success mainly in Asia. The first single, "What the Hell," went on sale on January 11; the second single is «Smile». The third single of the album is «Wish You Were Here».

Goodbye lullaby

Goodbye Lullaby had a low performance due to the null promotion of the record company RCA, which only gave priority to the songs pop of the album, has been the target of multiple criticisms, mainly for the content of their lyrics, as they are clearly dedicated to failure of the marriage with the leader of the band Sum 41, Deryck Whibley.

Goodbye lullaby

This album is where the singer, apart from using her vocal skills, and writing, made her debut as a producer, and absolute producer of two of the songs on the album ("Goodbye" and "4 Real"), describing herself as a true challenge, since she had never made songs by herself, in its entirety.

It is below his previous albums (with 2 million copies) as Let Go (the best seller with more than 20 million copies), Under My Skin and The Best Damn Thing.

Let go

It has sold more than 20 million copies worldwide becoming one of the ten best-selling albums of the 2000s. Being a total success, the album had 3 consecutive singles in number 1. According to Billboard, the album occupies the position 21 of the best of the 2000s, and according to Rolling Stone is number four.

Avril lavigne

It is the first self-titled album and fifth studio album by the Canadian singer.

The album is a follow-up to his 2011 album Goodbye Lullaby. Lavigne has collaborated with numerous producers including Martin Johnson of Boys Like Girls, Peter Svensson, David Hodges, Matt Squire and her husband Chad Kroeger of Nickelback.In both aspects, musical and lyrical, the album represents a departure from his previous production, including a more pop and optimistic sound.