Faiz Ahmad Faiz is one of the most prolific writers in Pakistan, well-known for his poetry collections. He lived during the most crucial period in the history of India and Pakistan. His poems are notable for their aesthetic and artistic values. In the latter part of his literary career, he started incorporating revolutionary ideas in his poems. He is among the most prominent progressive writers who lived during that period. Literature can always be used to influence the common people’s mind. Literature and politics are always interwound with each other. This paper studies the writings of Faiz Ahmed Faiz, and brings out how his poems are loaded with political metaphors and foresees how the poet has used radical ideas throughout his writings to kindle the minds of men of the working class and bring about a political change in their society.

Subalterns, the palpable fuel of society's power structure, are always marginalized by the tormentors from the corridors of power. The oppressors use their life force to make them oppressed. One of the main tasks of literature is to reveal the truth of society. Kazi Nazrul Islam and Faiz Ahmed Faiz, two prominent revolutionary poets in the Indian subcontinent, spoke on behalf of the masses but in two different languages (Bengali and Urdu). Their poems still carry considerable importance in the context of contemporaneity. The exploitation of the power-centric society and resistance of the subaltern have come alive through their poetry. The poets undertaken for the present research consistently speak out against ethnic violence and political exploitation in their verses. The words for the wretched are always uttered in their voice. They have portrayed the misery of the marginalized people and suggested the way of achieving true freedom. Their poems transcend their time because of the universality of their contents and themes. Their poems intrinsically support subaltern studies worldwide. This study aims to compare Kazi Nazrul Islam and Faiz Ahmed Faiz on the grounds of their concerns for the subaltern and their resistance infusing with three theoretical concepts, subaltern, power, theory of resistance. The study will further focus on how the two poets with their similarities have depicted the marginalized voice of the subalterns.

FAIZ AHMED FAIZ: ANALYSIS OF POLITICS AND POETRY Ralph Russell looks at different aspects of Faiz's life and concludes that Faiz replicated his attitude in poetry, life, and politics. Faiz desired luxurious life and the same can be reflected in his poetry and social interaction. Russell shares that Faiz desired praise, comfortable life while concealing facts should not be the attitude of a progressive person. Russell was told that in practical life Faiz had nothing to do with the depressed people and he never stepped in a muddy house. He only liked the floors "covered with the most expensive carpets." Many literary people sarcastically said on Faiz's return to Pakistan after self-exile that Faiz would create poetry against the martial law and its injustice when Gen. Ziaul Haq had died (Hameed, 2013: 51-53 and 61). Gopi Chand Narang is also of the same opinion that Faiz was not a rebel poet (Ibid., 65). Faiz could not bear the physical torture, hardships and imprisonment because of the decaying age factor (Ibid.). Dr. Ayub Mirza, a staunch admirer of Faiz, produced a devotional accounts regarding Faiz yet Faiz's personality and poetry needs deeper and objective study. Faiz Ahmed Faiz was a poet, journalist, teacher, voice of the depressed, advocate of peace and tranquility, labour rights activist and sympathizer of the left-wing ideology in politics. After the emergence of Pakistan, owing to his tilt towards communism and Russia, a few governments persecuted him but this affiliation enabled him to win the Lenin Peace Prize. He for some time rendered his services to the Pakistani governments which assigned him the duty to promote literature and culture while sometimes the governments considered him their rival and sent him to jail. Faiz as a dynamic and vibrant personality has influenced everyone who understands Urdu language and has sympathy for the marginalized groups. People, working for humanity and labour class throughout the world, remember Faiz in good words. This enadeavour focuses on Faiz's struggle for rights, and sufferings as depicted in his poetry and other accounts. Left-wing politics and the Rawalpindi Conspiracy Case raised several questions. Being far away from the electoral politics, Faiz focused merely on the intellectual contribution to the rights of the deprived groups. Sometimes he practically participated in the trade unions and raised his voice for the oppressed people living in any corner of the world. Brutality and inhuman action by any government anywhere was taken up by Faiz which highlights his vision and his polite and peaceful nature. Faiz's personality and work reflect his clear-cut vision about a society especially of Pakistan in which rule of law and justice should be ensured. This study concludes that not a theocrat but as a balanced Muslim, Faiz loved Islam, democracy, Pakistan and the system which could provide justice and prosperity to the depressed classes.

The theory of New Historicism is a Post-modern conception. New Historicists intend to comprehend the work of art through its &quot;cultural context&quot; and strive to make out &quot;intellectual history through literature&quot;. In this way literature becomes the reflection of the society.This study points out some of the literary works to establish the proposition that contextual references have always been the part of the creative writing. This research paper particularly seeks to explore various assumptions and propositions of New Historicism recurrent in Faiz Ahmed Faiz&#39;s poetry. Faiz in his poetry has emerged as a voice against the injustice and socio-political strife prevailing during his times. This study traces out those historical incidents which persuaded him to express the wrongs of the society in his poems. InMichael Delahoyde words,&quot;New Historicism seeks to find meaning in a text by considering the work within the framework of the prevailing ideas and assumpti...