Emmett “Steve” Mills, 76, of Bean Rd., Hadley, PA, went to drive 18-wheeler’s in heaven on Thursday, September 2, 2021 at 9:40 am.

He was born on January 12, 1945 in Birmingham, AL, to Emmett C. and Fern Frances (Staples) Mills.

Steve attended Greenville High School and served in the United States Navy. He spent most of his life as an over-the-road truck driver for Gordie Payne, Sherwin Williams Paint, Ivex, and owned his own semi-truck.

Steve enjoyed working on old cars and trucks, storytelling, car collecting, attending car shows and car cruises, and going to his son, Cliff’s camp in Tidioute. He was very proud of his 1967 Chevy pickup truck that he and his son, Jeff, built together.

Steve was very hardworking and family oriented. He had an incredible sense of humor and bright commanding presence. Steve was loved by so many and will be truly missed.

He is survived by his wife, Virginia “Ginny” (Murray) Mills. They were married on January 29, 1972, almost 50 years of marriage.

Also surviving are: two sons, Cliff Mills, and companion Mistie Ansell, of Tidioute, and Jeff Mills of Atlantic; three grandchildren, Doug Davison of Edinboro, Brad Davison of Atlantic, and Chance Lloyd of Atlantic; four children who lovingly referred to him as “Papa Steve,” Gunner and Eva Ansell of Hadley, and Matthew and Karleigh Chess of Hadley; two sisters, Mary Thomas of Powhatan, VA, and Jeanie Kremis, and her husband, Jeff, of Greenville; brother-in-law, Tom Murray, and his wife, Beth, of Hadley, two sisters-in-law, Elaine Owen of Greenville, and Donna Murray of Greenville; many nieces and nephews, Terrie, Shelby, and husband, Linwood, Kathy, and husband, Brian, Chuck, and wife, Melissa, Donna, and husband, Tony, Sherry, and husband, Bob, Sandy, and husband, Scott, Harry ”Moose,” and wife, Amy, Richie, and wife, Holly, Ryan, and wife, Bianca, Danny, and wife, Paula, Craig, and wife, Nancy, Kelley, and husband, Kurt, Stephanie, and husband, Dustin, Teresa, Michael, Alex, and companion, Angie, Nadena, and husband, Leigh, and Nanette, and husband, Bill; and numerous great-nieces and nephews.

He was preceded in death by his parents, infant grandson, Kaden Tyler Mills, and brothers-in-law, Charles “Lefty” Thomas, and Harry Murray.

Memorial visitation and service will be on Saturday, September 11, 2021 from 9:00 am to 10:30 am the time of service with Rev. James Sodano officiating at the Robert L. Snyder Funeral Home and Crematory, Inc. 3223 Perry Hwy, Sheakleyville. PA , 16151

Condolences and memories may be shared with the family online at www.snyderfh.com.