The Best of Gregory Benford

Gregory Benford, edited by David G. Hartwell. Subterranean (subterraneanpress.com), $40 (616p) ISBN 978-1-59606-686-1

This uneven collection by the prolific Benford (the Galactic Center Saga novels), who’s best known for the hard-science underpinnings of his SF, draws from over four decades of work. Inevitably, a collection this broad will include some dated writing, but, paradoxically, some of the oldest pieces seem the freshest. Among the 1970s stories are “Doing Lennon,” in which a wannabe rock star freezes himself with the hope of emerging, thawed, as the famous Beatle, and “Time Shards,” in which cautionary advice is provided by a message left for posterity in a 13th-century clay pot. More recent stories are less imaginative. “A Life with a Semisent,” in which a young Iraqi girl grows close to the title character, seems derivative for 2005, as well as generally implausible. Benford is at his weakest when he ventures into politics. “Comes the Evolution,” peopled by characters named Lenin, Trotsky, Jefferson, and Washington, is a muddled and unfocused story of politics in the near future, and “Proselytes” heavy-handedly juxtaposes, in the form of alien races, harmlessly annoying door-to-door missionaries and the murderous coercion of historical Islam. Encouragingly, the most recent story included, “Backscatter,” with its capitalist spin on human-AI interaction, is a welcome indication that Benford has not quite lost his skill as a storyteller. (Aug.)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 06/08/2015

Genre: Fiction

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

Gregory Benford

Expanded from his 1990 novella, "Beyond the Fall of Night," this dense, lively, far-future SF novel from Benford (The Martian Race ) sweeps readers away Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

In this unexceptional and somewhat slow-moving follow-up to The Martian Race (1999), Benford sends Julia and Viktor, the first astronauts to land on Mars, off Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

With so many Mars novels having been published in recent years, including award-winning fiction by Kim Stanley Robinson and others, it's hard to believe that even a talented writer like Benford Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

For readers more familiar with this acclaimed hard-SF author's illuminating and genre-stretching novels (Eater; Cosm; etc.), this story collection is an excellent chance to discover his equally adept Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

Alicia Butterworth, a talented young black scientist, is elated to be able to try out her experiment in nuclear physics at Brookhaven National Laboratory's Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. Things Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

In his first foray into book-length nonfiction, acclaimed science fiction writer and physics professor Benford (Timescape, Cosm etc.) combines a scientist's perspective and a novelist's imagination Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

Benford (The Martian Race), a physics professor at UC-Irvine and a Nebula winner for his novel Timescape, is one of the leading exponents of hard SF--which, no matter how fantastic it might seem, Continue reading »

Gregory Benford, Elisabeth Malartre

The simple title of this book belies its profundity-and its sense of humor. Besides an up-to-date, comprehensive overview of developments in the fields of robotics and artificial intelligence, Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

The award-winning author (If the Stars Are Gods, Timescape has a reputation for bridging the often hostile camps of hard-science SF and the more literary, humanist variety. In this collection of Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

To celebrate the rturn of Halley's comet this year, two of SF's best young writers have collaborated on this long, intriguing but ultimately depressing novel that begins with the next fly-by in 2061. Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

This fifth installment (after Tides of Light ) in Benford's ``Galactic Center'' series, set thousands of years in the future, finds the remaining humans from the planet Snowglade fleeing the Continue reading »

Gregory Benford, Arthur Charles Clarke

One of Clarke's early novels, Against the Fall of Night , has long been recognized as among his very best; the tale of a young man's need to escape from the limits of the last cities on Earth, it Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

Fifteen years ago, Benford's Timescape set the tone for the subgenre of ``hard'' science fiction that deals with quantum effects and particle physics, the discoveries and theories of which often make Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

Set thousands of years in the future, this novel begins the Second Foundation Trilogy, a prequel to Isaac Asimov's famous original (1951-1953) about the waning centuries of a galactic empire. The Continue reading »

Larry Niven, Gregory Benford

SF doyens Benford (Chiller) and Niven (the Ringworld series) collaborate on a strong SF series launch. Something goes wrong with Earth’s SunSeeker space expedition, leaving the crew without enough Continue reading »

Gregory Benford

SF author Benford (the Galactic Center series) makes the relevant science accessible to the lay reader in this intriguing alternate history thriller that speculates on the road not taken in the Continue reading »

Hartwell and Cramer (The Ascent of Wonder ) present 23 fantastic stories in this brilliant anthology, the first trade paperback installment of their popular Continue reading »

The seventh annual fantasy anthology from the renowned husband and wife editing team of Hartwell and Cramer is arguably the strongest and most thematically diverse. Complementing works from genre Continue reading »

Two“Year's Best”anthologies approach the superlative. Continue reading »

David G. Hartwell

This third reading anthology from the Science Fiction Research Association offers the uninitiated an excellent and informed introduction to the genre while also supplying fans with plenty of new Continue reading »

This massive tome contains some of the good, the bad and the ugly stories that have helped give ``hard'' science fiction its reputation as a refuge for writers more comfortable with a slide rule than Continue reading »

Over the past quarter century, Hartwell has built a well-deserved reputation in SF, fantasy and horror as an editor extraordinaire. In addition to discovering many of the leading luminaries in the Continue reading »

The wordcraft and imagination at play in this collection of 20 SF stories by Australian writers is quite extraordinary. The book is full of gorgeously imagined scenes on a transgalactic scale and Continue reading »

The Hard SF Renaissance, a hefty story anthology edited by David G. Hartwell and Kathryn Cramer, showcases such talents as Paul McAuley, Greg Egan, Ted Chiang and Vernor Vinge, who have returned Continue reading »

Michael Berlyn

The crew members of a spaceship sent from Earth to probe neighboring planetary systems are biogenetically changed by an alien race called the Habers into pseudo-Habers in hopes that they will help Continue reading »

Terry Bisson

Space travel is viewed with a witty, original eye in Bisson's entertaining novel. The U.S. has survived the Greater Depression by selling off assets to settle its debts. Disney has bought NASA, and Continue reading »

Hartwell has compiled three previous anthologies of Christmas stories ( Christmas Ghosts and Spirits of Christmas , which combined reprints and original material, and Christmas Stars , a collection Continue reading »

This excellent collection of Canadian science fiction written in the past 20 years embodies a high level of skill and sophistication among its 25 short stories, two novel excerpts and two essays on Continue reading »

Piers Anthony, Julie Brady

Gathering a stellar array of 22 SF stories penned by either native Canadians or writers who simply prefer to publish there, this is a worthy companion volume to Northern Stars (1994). Wesley Herbert Continue reading »

Just in time for the holiday season comes the reissue of David Hartwell's 1992 anthology Christmas Stars, which gathers 25 Yule-themed tales by such contemporary masters of SF and fantasy as Ray Continue reading »

Michael Moorcock (et al.)

Heroes and their mighty deeds populate the pages of this delightfully kitschy, yet absorbing anthology of sword and sorcery short stories from the 1930s onward. Hartwell and Weisman have selected Continue reading »

Patrick Nielsen Hayden, David G. Hartwell

Reviewed by Gardner Dozois. In my more than 40 years working in the science fiction publishing industry, I’ve seen this notion crop up every 10 years or so: “Science fiction has exhausted itself. Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS