Amy Schumer has been leaving audiences in stitches ever since she rose to fame almost ten years ago - but away from the spotlight, the actress relished spending quality time with her husband Chris Fischer and their son, Gene. The Hollywood star would have been more grateful than ever for her family's support of late, having recently opened up about her Cushing's Syndrome diagnosis. She admitted that while she is lucky that the diagnosis will "work itself out", it can be "fatal".

Talking to News Not Noise, she said: "There are a few types of Cushing. Some that can be fatal, require brain surgery or removal of adrenal glands."

"I have the kind of Cushing that will just work itself out and I'm healthy [which] was the greatest news imaginable," she added.

Want to know more about her husband and family life? Keeping reading to find out...

Who is Amy's husband Chris Fischer?

Since 2018, the 2022 Oscars host has been married to American chef and farmer Chris Fischer. Chris is best known for being a chef in Martha's Vineyard - a Massachusetts island just south of Cape Cod - and has worked at a number of restaurants. Beyond this, he has also written a book called Beetlebung Farm Cookbook: A Year of Cooking on Martha's Vineyard.

The pair tied the knot the day after Valentine's Day at a jaw-dropping private home in California that is reported to be worth $23million.

At the time, Amy kept her nuptials under wraps but has since revealed a number of behind-the-scenes videos and photos from the ceremony, including her gorgeous wedding gown.

Prior to the announcement of their wedding, Amy had not publicly announced her relationship with Chris, who is actually the brother of her assistant, Molly. It's believed that they began dating sometime in 2017.

When did Amy Schumer welcome her baby boy?

They welcomed their first child together, Gene David, in May 2019. Amy previously detailed how hard both her pregnancy and labour were, revealing that doctors were surprised she was able to even carry her baby in the first place as she suffers from endometriosis.

The couple revealed in 2020 that they had been trying for a second baby via In vitro fertilization but were unsuccessful. On Sunday Today with Willie Geist, she revealed: "We did IVF, and IVF was really tough on me. I don't think I could ever do IVF again."

"I decided that I can't be pregnant ever again," she added. "We thought about a surrogate, but I think we're going to hold off for right now."

Before meeting her husband, Amy was in a relationship with Chicago-based furniture designer Ben Hanisch. The pair got together at the start of 2016 after meeting on a dating app and made things official when they stepped out together at that year's Golden Globes Awards. Sadly, though, they called things quits 18 months later, in May 2017.

Amy's other famous exes include professional wrestler Nick Nemeth, better known by his ring name Dolph Ziggler, and fellow comedian Anthony Jeselnik.