Demi Moore was left heartbroken when her ex-husband Bruce Willis was unable to recognise her, according to Closer. When the American actress visited the Hollywood icon after a trip away in Italy during the summer, the 60-year-old was faced with a heartbreaking realisation.

Speaking to the magazine, sources claim the Die Hard actor, 68, who is battling with a form of dementia known as frontotemporal dementia, is no longer able to acknowledge Demi, his ex-wife, with whom he shares three daughters. The pair married in 1987 and stayed together for 13 years, sharing three children together: Rumer, 35, Scout, 32, and Tallulah, 29.

An insider said: “Demi kept in touch with the kids and Bruce’s wife, Emma Heming. But she had no idea he’d gone so far downhill.” While Demi was in Italy, the insider alleges Bruce's memory of her “faded." They added: “Demi could tell he really didn’t recognise her.”

However, the source claims he is still able to recognise his wife Emma and his children at times. The insider told Closer he “expresses joy” when his eldest daughter Rumer enters the room with her new baby, Lou. According to the outlet, the source also claims Bruce can be "aggressive," and is 'experiencing physical decline'.

Bruce made headlines last year after going public with his condition. His devastating health condition was first revealed in spring 2022, as his family announced the star has aphasia.

The condition affects a person's ability to understand language and communicate. They went on to confirm he would be retiring from acting.

It was then later announced his health battle was the result of frontotemporal dementia. According to the NHS, frontotemporal dementia is an uncommon type of dementia that causes problems with behaviour and language.

Signs of the disease can include personality and behaviour changes, language problems, problems with mental abilities and memory problems. These problems can make daily activities increasingly difficult, and the person may eventually be unable to look after themselves.

There's currently no cure for frontotemporal dementia or any treatment that will slow it down. But there are treatments that can help control some of the symptoms, possibly for several years.