SINCE making her film debut in 1981, Demi Moore's love life has been center stage.

Here we take a look at her previous marriages to Hollywood icons.

How many times has Demi Moore been married?

Since stepping into the spotlight, Demi Moore has been linked to several high-profile guys.

She has also tied the knot with three of them, including:

Freddy Moore

Demi's first marriage was to Freddy Moore at the age of 17 in 1980.

During their partnership, Demi took his surname as her stage surname, but their communion only lasted until 1985.

While not much is known about their relationship, she did reveal that she cheated on her first husband the night before their wedding in her 2019 autobiography.

"The night before we got married, instead of working on my vows, I was calling a guy I'd met on a movie set," she wrote, via PEOPLE.

"I snuck out of my own bachelorette party and went to his apartment. Why did I do that? Why didn't I go and see the man I was committing to spend the rest of my life with to express my doubts?

"I couldn't face the fact that I was getting married to distract myself from grieving the death of my father.

"Because I felt there was no room to question what I'd already put in motion. I couldn't get out of the marriage, but I could sabotage it."

Demi and Freddy- who was 12 years older than the actress- previously met in a nightclub in 1979 while he was married to his wife Lucy.

Freddy later married his third wife, Renne Moore, in 2005, and the pair were together until his August 2022 passing.

Bruce Willis

Demi's second marriage was to Die Hard actor Bruce Willis which began on November 21, 1987, and ended on October 18, 2000.

At first, the pair- who only dated for four months before tying the knot- was considered one of Hollywood's golden couples, however, Demi claims that Bruce "wanted to do whatever the f*** he wanted" when they were married.

While they might have gone their separate ways, they have remained friendly over the years and were even seen isolating together during the Covid-19 pandemic.

Bruce later re-married Emma Heming in 2009.

Ashton Kutcher

Demi's third marriage was with That '70s Show actor Ashton Kutcher, who is 15 years younger than her.

Their wedding happened on September 24, 2005, and welcomed around 150 guests.

However, the marriage came to an end with the couple separating in 2011 and divorcing in 2013.

In that same memoir, Demi also discussed her marriage to Ashton and revealed that she suffered a miscarriage.

"Ashton did his best to connect with me in my grief. He tried to be there for me during the miscarriage, but he couldn't really understand what I was feeling," Moore wrote, via Insider.

"First of all, he hadn't carried this baby. And second, he was in his twenties at the time: he wasn't remotely late to the game of fatherhood. His possibilities were not running out, far from it. I was suddenly acutely aware that mine were," she added.

During a 2023 interview with Esquire, Ashton then opened up about the miscarriage and their marriage, revealing that it made him feel like a "f***ing failure."

“Nothing makes you feel like a failure like divorce,” he told the outlet.

“Divorce feels like a wholesale f***ing failure. You failed at marriage.”

He added: "Losing a kid that you think you're going to have, and that close to thinking you're going to have a kid, is really, really painful.

"Everyone deals with that in different ways," he continued, noting that "for whatever reason, I had to have that experience."

Two years after his divorce was finalized, he then married his That '70s Show co-star Mila Kunis and welcomed two kids, Wyatt and Dimitri.

How many children does Demi Moore have?

Before Demi and Ashton's miscarriage, the G.I. Jane actress welcomed three kids with Bruce.

They first welcomed Rumer in 1988, then Scout in 1991, and lastly Tallulah in 1994.

All three of them have since dabbled followed in their parent's footsteps and launched successful careers in the entertainment industry as actors.