Beto O'Rourke married his wife, Amy, in 2005, about a year after they met on a blind date. They crossed the border to Juarez, Mexico, and went to that city's famous Kentucky Club, which claims to have invented the margarita.

She is part of an El Paso nonprofit, CREEED, that promotes educational attainment and opportunity in El Paso. It has also been linked to the expansion of charter schools in the area.

Who is Amy O'Rourke?

Amy O'Rourke, who is nine years younger than Beto, has a bachelor's degree in psychology from Williams College in Massachusetts.

She started her career as an educator in Guatemala, where she taught kindergarten. After returning to El Paso in 2004, she began working with Centro de Salud Familiar La Fe, and helped create the health and human services organization's preparatory school — a dual-language kindergarten through eighth grade. Amy O'Rourke was the first superintendent of the school in South El Paso's Segundo Barrio and served from 2007 to 2012.

Amy O'Rourke took over the company her husband founded, Stanton Street Technology Group, in January 2013, after he was first elected to Congress. She sold her stake in the company in 2017, during Beto O'Rourke's Senate campaign.

O'Rourke children

Beto and Amy O'Rourke had their first child, Ulysses, about a year after getting married.

During a chat on Twitter, Beto O'Rourke said Ulysses was named for the character in Homer's "The Odyssey," which is one of his favorite books. "We didn't have the guts to name him Odysseus," he wrote. He often used a more colorful term for "guts" during his Senate stump speech, Texas Monthly reported.

The O'Rourkes had Molly about a year after Ulysses was born, and Henry was born about three years after Molly. All three attend the same public schools their dad did.

WHO IS BETO O'ROURKE?: Get to know the possible 2020 presidential candidate

Beto O'Rourke's father, mother, siblings

Beto O'Rourke followed his father into politics. Patrick "Pat" Francis O'Rourke served as a county commissioner and county judge in El Paso. He was elected as a Democrat, but in the late 1990s, he ran an unsuccessful race to reclaim the county judge spot as a Republican. He died in an accident in 2001, when a car struck his recumbent bicycle.

O'Rourke's mother, Melissa, operated three furniture stores in El Paso, but announced the closure of the last one, Charlotte's Furniture, in 2017. The announcement came after her son had launched his Senate campaign, but she said at the time that her decision was unrelated. "For me, it's my personal life," she said. "I'm just ready to call it."

Melissa O'Rourke's businesses became an issue during Beto's Senate campaign, when Ted Cruz's campaign called Beto a hypocrite for advocating for changes in sales tax policies.

Cruz said O'Rourke had failed to mention an 2010 federal court settlement involving his mother's furniture store. O'Rourke said at the time that the case had long been resolved.

Charlotte's Furniture was accused of manipulating financial records in the early 2000s. It was charged as a corporate entity and pleaded guilty in 2010, agreeing to pay a $250,000 fine. The shop accepted more than $630,000 in cash payments from an unidentified customer and altered records so daily transactions were not reported to the IRS.

BETO IN IOWA: O'Rourke to make first trip ahead of possible 2020 presidential run

A less serious allegation about Beto O'Rourke's mother involved a stump speech line about his "lifelong Republican" mother who was now supporting him for the Senate in Texas. However, he acknowledged in a BuzzFeed article, that his characterization of Melissa O'Rourke wasn't entirely accurate. CNN later reported that she had primarily voted in Democratic primaries since 2000 and that she had donated to both Republican and Democratic candidates, including Mitt Romney and Ted Cruz in 2012 and Barack Obama in 2007.

O'Rourke is the oldest of three children. His two sisters are Erin and Charlotte. Charlotte often joined their mother, Melissa, on the campaign trail for Beto.

Amy O'Rourke's father, mother, siblings

Amy O'Rourke is the daughter of William "Bill" Sanders, a real-estate mogul whose net worth was estimated at about $500 million by Forbes magazine. Her mother is Louann Feuille Sanders, a member of a prominent El Paso family.

Amy's maternal grandfather Richard Harlan Feuille was awarded the Bronze Star and a Purple Heart for his service in World War II before practicing law in El Paso, where he was the president of the local Bar Association.

Amy is one of five children. She has two brothers, Richard and Pablo, and two sisters, Marianna and Christina.

The El Paso Times isn't just another subscription. With our digital pass, you can get unlimited access to coverage on Beto O'Rourke, the border wall and more local news. Extend your support today for just $1 a month for the first 3 months.

WHO IS BETO O'ROURKE?