The Guardian today (Wednesday 15 November) announced the launch of the very first Guardian Advertising Awards.

Free to enter, the new awards celebrate and champion advertising campaigns that have featured across Guardian channels over the last year, highlighting unforgettable examples of scale, influence and integrity - the unique formula offered to advertisers by the Guardian.

Campaigns advertised in the Guardian are unmissable - with a huge global audience (scale), a part of journalism that reflects and shapes culture (influence), in a trusted media environment that represents the values of its audience (integrity).

The Guardian Advertising Awards offer an exceptional opportunity for brands and agencies to elevate visibility of their campaigns both within the industry and in front of a global audience of Guardian readers and consumers. In addition, award winners will be prominently showcased through dedicated feature articles across Guardian platforms in digital.

Winners will be judged in the following five categories that best reflect advertising displayed across the Guardian:

Everyday brands: The everyday brands that consumers can’t live without. From store cupboard favourites to supermarkets and highstreet banks.

Brands connecting with big moments: The brands present in the moments when everyone is looking in the same direction. Festivals, football matches, film releases or watercooler TV - anywhere there’s joy to be had.

Premium brands: Everything from classic luxury to premium lines in the weekly shop, a fancy new face cream, or a posh biscuit.

Brands doing the right thing: The purpose driven brands. Working to make a positive social and environmental impact.

Challenger brands: The brands that want to shake things up. The disruptors who believe there is a better way to do everything, no matter which industry they are in.

There will also be a Grand Prix award for the brands that go above and beyond the entry criteria. Brands cannot enter this category, the Grand Prix winner will be selected by the judges from all of the winning campaigns.

A specially selected panel made up of some of the most influential leaders and experts from across the media and advertising industry will be judging the awards. The judging panel includes Rory Sutherland, vice chairman of Ogilvy UK; Nishma Robb, senior director, brand and reputation marketing at Google and Andy Nairn founder of creative agency Lucky Generals.

Rory Sutherland, vice chairman of Ogilvy UK, says:

“It’s been quite a few years since I sat on any juries, and I am eagerly looking forward to seeing some great work again, since it is increasingly hard to find it in everyday life.”

Imogen Fox, chief advertising officer, Guardian Media Group, says:

“We’re so proud to launch the Guardian Advertising Awards and excited to honour all the smart and creative campaigns we’ve helped display over the last year. Scale, influence and integrity encompasses all that Guardian Advertising stands for and we hope more brands will be inspired when they see how to get the best out of working with us.”

James Fleetham, director of clients, marketing and research, Guardian News & Media, says:

“Brands talk to us all the time about wanting to be part of culture. That’s because the Guardian is really good at sharing massive cultural moments, whether that be through our sports, lifestyle coverage or fashion. These new awards aim to celebrate some of these most unmissable pieces of work.”

Enter the awards now

The Guardian Advertising Awards are open for award entries now. Submissions are welcome from brands and agencies across the UK who have placed advertising on any Guardian platforms including digital, audio and print. All campaign entries must have been launched (or be current) on the Guardian within the last 12 months (November 2022 to November 2023).

Entries must be submitted by 11:59 pm 0n Wednesday 31 January 2024. The winners will be announced at an awards ceremony in spring 2024.

See here for more information on how to enter and the terms and conditions.

[Ends]

For more information please contact media.enquiries@theguardian.com.

Notes to editors

About Guardian News & Media