Guardian News & Media produces a variety of content with funding from outside parties. These sources of revenue allow us to explore topics that we hope are of interest to Guardian and Observer readers. The presentation of the content makes clear how the content has been commissioned and produced, and who has funded it.

One of four labels will appear on this content: ‘Supported by’, ‘Advertising partner/Exclusive advertising partner’, ‘Paid content/Paid for by’, or ‘Advertiser content/from our advertisers’.

Supported by

‘Supported by’ is used to describe editorially independent content. We accept funding from third parties both for new projects and for content we are already producing. Before funding is agreed with a client, relevant senior editors are consulted about its suitability and the editor-in-chief has the final say on whether a funding deal is accepted. A client whose branding appears on editorial content may have a role in suggesting what kind of topics are covered, but the commissioning editor is not obliged to accept ideas from the funder. The content is written and edited by Guardian and Observer journalists, or those approved by GNM, to the same standards expected in all of our journalism. GNM will not show copy to funders for approval.

‘Supported by’ is also used to describe editorially independent content that the Guardian has produced with funding from foundations around the world who support specific projects. A full list of our philanthropic projects can be found here.

Advertising partner/Exclusive advertising partner

‘Advertising partner/Exclusive advertising partner’ is used by Guardian US to describe editorially independent content funded by commercial third parties as set out above. This label is never applied to content produced with funding from foundations.

Paid content/paid for by

‘Paid content/paid for by’ is used to describe advertisement features that are paid for and controlled by the advertiser rather than the publisher and are subject to regulation by the Advertising Standards Authority in the UK, the Federal Trade Commission in the US and the Advertising Standards Bureau in Australia. This content is produced by commercial departments and does not involve GNM staff journalists.

‘Advertiser content’ or content ‘from our advertisers’

‘Advertiser content/content from our advertisers’ is used to describe advertisement features that are paid for and produced by the advertiser rather than the publisher. They are subject to regulation by the Advertising Standards Authority in the UK, the Federal Trade Commission in the US and the Advertising Standards Bureau in Australia. This content is created by advertisers and hosted by the Guardian and does not involve GNM staff journalists.