The image of Gene Kelly hanging on a lamppost with an umbrella in his hand from the film “Singin’ in the Rain” is iconic, but how much do we know about the man who created that moment? Kelly was a triple threat: actor, dancer and singer, as well as a film director, producer and choreographer. He was born in 1912 and grew up in Pennsylvania; he died in Beverly Hills in 1996.

But that’s only a snippet of Kelly’s story. His widow, Patricia Kelly, wants people to learn more about him when she presents “Gene Kelly: The Legacy” Saturday and Sunday at the Pasadena Playhouse.

“It’s not a lecture,” Kelly said. “It’s like you’re sitting in the living room having a chat. Even if it’s 1,200 people there’s an intimacy there. It’s a magical thing that I feel really privileged to share.”

The Los Angeles resident was Kelly’s third wife. The two met in 1985 at the Smithsonian when Kelly was serving as the narrator of a television special for which she was a writer. Not long after that, Kelly invited her to move to California to write his memoir. While working on the book, they fell in love and married in 1990. He was 77; she was 31.

August 2012 was the 100th anniversary of Gene Kelly’s birth, and there were a number of celebrations held by the entertainment industry that year.

“I learned that everyone would be doing something for the centenary and he was very, very specific as to how he was to be remembered and I thought, well, why don’t I take the opportunity, since he shared that with me in such detail, why don’t I take that information and put it out there so people will actually have Gene on Gene as he wanted to be known,” Kelly said.

In May 2012, Kelly unveiled “Gene Kelly: The Legacy” at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Beverly Hills for two sold-out nights. She went on to repeat the show at the Film Society of Lincoln Center in New York City in July 2012 and the University of Pittsburgh in October 2012, selling out every show. The good response inspired Kelly to take the production on the road.

“What’s so interesting and the comment I hear very often as people leave the theater is ‘I never knew that about him,’ ” Kelly said. “‘I never knew he was behind the camera. I never knew he was so articulate. I never knew he was such an intellectual.’”

“Gene Kelly: The Legacy” includes film clips and rare audio recordings. Kelly was fluent in a number of languages, wrote poetry and had many interests. His widow said he also was a loving and exciting spouse.

“He was a true romantic,” Kelly said. “He was a guy that would wake you up to look at the full moon at night. And he’d sing these extraordinary songs with these beautiful lyrics just to convey a feeling.”

Kelly also shares the secrets to her husband’s success, which included his drive for excellence, a demand Kelly made not only of himself, but also of his colleagues.

“He said to me that the real challenge was to create something that is both contemporary and is also timeless. I think because he was able to achieve that, we’re still watching his movies 60-plus years later,” she said.

Kelly created a style of dance that was uniquely American and continues to inspire dancers and choreographers, as well as cinematographers and film directors, she said.

“He’s really contemporary. His movement, that’s what young dancers and choreographers are still turning to. He doesn’t look dated, he looks cool and relevant,” Kelly said. “It’s exciting to see new young artists who have been touched by Gene, yet they’re going beyond and taking the art and creating new things. It makes his work very much alive.”

Kelly will continue touring with “Gene Kelly: The Legacy,” taking it to Germany, Canada, Switzerland and other countries. She also has created another show about her husband, which is set to open at Carnegie Hall in New York City in December. She also is finishing his memoir, the book that started it all for her.