Newton Running is hosting a panel of national running industry experts, on 9 August, to discuss the current science surrounding running form and footwear. The panel of top athletes, coaches, physicians and researchers will discuss and answer questions on topics ranging from the most recent scientific research on running form and biomechanics, to the latest trends in shoe technology.

"In 2007, when we launched Newton Running with shoes that promote a more efficient, natural running form, Christopher McDougall’s book, ‘Born To Run’ had not yet been published and barefoot running was still limited to a group of underground devotees," said Newton Running co-founder and CEO, Jerry Lee.

"Three years later, everyone seems to be talking about barefoot running and we’re at the forefront of a national trend towards running shoe minimalism. We’re incredibly excited to host this panel of experts to discuss the state of running today."

The panel will take place on Monday 9 August from 10:00-12:15 at the Hotel Boulderado in Boulder, Colorado. The event is free and open to the public. The Newton Running panel itself includes: Jay Dicharry, Dr Irene Davis, Zola Budd, Danny Dreyer, Danny Abshire and Dr Mark Cucuzzella.

From a research perspective, Jay Dicharry, the director of the SPEED Performance Clinic at the University of Virginia’s Center for Endurance Sport, and Dr Irene Davis, the Director of the Running Injury Lab at the University of Delaware will discuss the most current scientific studies and research on running biomechanics.

Danny Dreyer, the founder of Chi Running and a 40-time ultramarathon finisher, will share his experience teaching thousands of people a more natural running technique.

Olympian, two-time World Cross-Country champion, and famous barefoot runner Zola Budd, will describe her experience running shoeless and share her perspective on running form and injury prevention.

Danny Abshire, an ultra-marathoner and a running form coach to seven Ironman World Champions, will discuss his experience in shoe design as a co-founder of Newton Running.

Rounding out the all-star panel is Dr Mark Cucuzzella, a national champion masters runner, family physician and prominent running researcher, who has emerged as one of the nation’s leading experts on running biomechanics.