It is an early December morning. The South China Athletic Association stadium was bathed in warm winter sunshine. The atmosphere was vibrant as a group of football players, wearing CITIC CLSA jerseys, defended their goal on the green field. Meanwhile, the CITIC CLSA basketball team players were fully engaged on the basketball court, focused on making the most shots.

Organized as part of the annual “Heep Hong Charity Sports Fun Day 2023”, these sports games along with other Fun Day activities helped to raise funds for Heep Hong Society’s “Children and Youth Training Fund”. Resonating with its mission of improving the wellbeing of children and young people of different abilities, CITIC CLSA Trust had donated HKD 100,000 to Heep Hong Society in support of the event in November 2023.

The event commenced on 2 December 2023, participated by over 900 children, parents and corporate representatives. Despite the slightly gloomy weather, everyone’s enthusiasm and sportsmanship remained undeterred. CITIC CLSA colleagues competed in the football and basketball corporate tournaments. After several hours of intense competition, both teams achieved outstanding results, with the football team even securing the first runner-up position. Besides corporate tournaments, Heep Hong Society also organized various sports games and theme booths for participants of all ages to join.

Thanks to the collective efforts of all attendees, a total of more than HKD 1,000,000 was raised. These funds will be used to provide better and timely education, assessment and therapy training to SEN children (children with special educational needs) and those from low-income families.

Reflecting on the event, one of our tournament players said, “It was a very special day for us and we truly enjoyed it. Hope to participate in more events like this in the future!” We are very pleased to have worked with Heep Hong Society on the fund-raiser and will continue fulfilling our responsibilities as a corporate citizen to enhance the wellbeing and education quality of children and youth in local communities across Hong Kong.

Founded in 1963, Heep Hong Society is a leading education and rehabilitation organization in Hong Kong that offers assessment, guidance, training and family support services to children and youth, especially SEN children. More than 23,000 children, young people and families benefit from its services every year.