The South China Athletic Association (SCAA) originated from the "Chinese Football Team" organised by students from an English college in 1908. It has a history of 115 years and has witnessed Hong Kong's fall and resurgence. In 1910, the "South China Football Club" was established with only 40 members. They began playing against external teams and officially joined the Hong Kong Football Association in 1916 when the "South China Recreation Club" was also established.

In 1920, the "South China Recreation Club" was renamed the "South China Athletic Association" and expanded its activities by establishing primary schools and charitable institutions. In order to provide better services, SCAA leased Caroline Hill Road from the government in 1927 to build football, athletics, volleyball, and basketball fields. The North Point Tsat Tsz Mui Swimming Pool and King's Park Tennis Court also entered service in 1929.

In 1941, Hong Kong fell during the war, and the North Point Tsat Tsz Mui Swimming Pool was destroyed in the conflict. The Japanese army also occupied the Mount Butler Clubhouse. It wasn't until 1946 when Hong Kong was liberated that the South China Athletic Association regained control of the Mount Butler Clubhouse and planned to revive its activities. Two years later, it fully resumed its services. As the North Point Swimming Pool was destroyed and unable to be used, the association built the Shau Kei Wan A Kung Ngam Swimming Pool in 1950.

Since its establishment, the SCAA has made significant contributions to sports development in Hong Kong. Numerous sports facilities have been built to cater to the needs of its members, including the Sports Complex, the multi-million dollar Sports Centre, and the Jockey Club Stadium, all of which have been put into service.

581 pieces of solar photovoltaic(PV) panels were installed at 3 locations in SCAA. They are on the rooftop of the Bowling Centre, on the rooftop of the Sports Complex (High Block) and the metal roof beside the running track at the Jockey Club Stadium R/F. The system capacity is 268.35kWp. Its estimated power generation in the first year is 265,230.3kWh.