Sonia Fowler is devastated by a confession from Martin Fowler and Lauren Branning in Thursday's episode of EastEnders (7:30 pm. See our TV Guide for full listings)

Sonia Fowler has resolutely stood by partner Reiss Colwell despite more than one MASSIVE red flag!

They first got together after Sonia's grandma Dot Branning's funeral, when Reiss - a great nephew of Dot's - turned up to pay his respects.

After ending up in bed, Reiss ghosted Sonia before finally getting back in touch with her. It turns out Reiss was hiding a huge secret, uncovered by Rocky Cotton, that he was married to a woman called Debbie, who was in a coma in a care home after having a stroke some years before.

Despite almost splitting up with Reiss over his lies, Sonia found it in her heart to forgive him. She then had to prize another secret out of him when he revealed he was infertile but ever the fixer, Sonia suggested IVF.

Reiss lied AGAIN when he told Sonia he had money in savings to pay for the treatment but was in fact Reiss was siphoning the money from Debbie's account.

Sonia gave him the benefit of the doubt and promised they would find a way to make the money they needed.

After making the huge decision to sell her house to fund her new life with Reiss, she confided in ex-husband Martin Fowler, along with uncle Jack Branning and cousin Lauren Branning.

The three were shocked that she was thinking of selling the Branning family home, although they tried to see Sonia's point of view.

Decision made, Sonia cooks a romantic meal for Reiss so she can tell him her big news but she's shocked when she has a surprise visit from Martin and Lauren.

Sonia is devastated when the worried pair make it clear that they trust Reiss as far as they could throw him and Sonia shouldn't be throwing away everything she has to be with him.

Furious, she throws them out of the house but now isolated from her family, are things going to end in more than tears?

Penny Branning has not been getting the feels over running the departed Whitney Dean's clothing stall in the market.

After a run-in with Ravi Gulati over his daughter Avani Nandra=Hart, who stole something, she's realised she's not cut out to be a market trader!

Penny is used to a much more glamorous life after growing up in Paris and when she discovers that Chelsea Fox is about to lose her job as manager of local club, Peggy's, her mind was set whirring.

She quickly made overtures to boss Phil Mitchell about taking Chelsea's place and he gave her the job!

Poor Chelsea is devastated that Phil has fired her for downing a glass of wine while at work.

Desperate not to lose her job she begs Phil to give her one last chance but has Penny now got the upper hand?