Book Synopsis

From the author of countless esteemed classics such as The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, , Mark Twain's A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court follows an American engineer named Hank Morgan. When Hank suffers from a severe head injury, he falls unconscious, only to wake up in the medieval Camelot years. Learning that he has somehow traveled through space and time to be present in 6th century England during the time of King Arthur's rule, Hank is shocked and worried when he is discovered by guards. However, after the initial confusion and concern, Hank understands the potential of his situation, and decides to use his future knowledge for the good of the people now around him. Of course, the subjects of King Arthur's kingdom were skeptical of him, and consequently, soon after Hank arrived his execution was scheduled. However, because of Hank's knowledge, he is able to trick the people, including the king himself, into thinking that he has special powers. After using a solar eclipse to "prove" his ability, Hank is elected into a position of power, using his new authority to modernize and Americanize the medieval people. Accepting the kingdom as his new home, Hank build relationships and feels that he is making an immense difference in the lives of King Arthur and his subjects. But when the Catholic church grows uneasy about Hank's new influence and ideas, Hank finds himself in even more danger than he was in when he was scheduled for death row. A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court by Mark Twain is a classic comedy that features reflective and fascinating topics of social justice and science. Though originally published in 1889, A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court addresses social and political issues that are still relevant today and even predicted the first world war. With an anecdotal narrative, Twain delivers a compelling plot with humorous prose and discussion of serious societal concerns. This edition of Mark Twain's A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court features a striking new cover design and is printed in a modern font to accommodate to the desires of a contemporary audience.

Since our inception in 2020, Mint Editions has kept sustainability and innovation at the forefront of our mission. Each and every Mint Edition title gets a fresh, professionally typeset manuscript and a dazzling new cover, all while maintaining the integrity of the original book.

With thousands of titles in our collection, we aim to spotlight diverse public domain works to help them find modern audiences. Mint Editions celebrates a breadth of literary works, curated from both canonical and overlooked classics from writers around the globe.

From the Back Cover