HOME SCHOOL BOOK REVIEW

Book: A Connecticut Yankee In King Arthur’s Court

Author: Mark Twain

Publisher: Penguin Group USA Inc., reprinted in 1994

ISBN-13: 9780451524751

ISBN-10: 0451524756

Language level: 3 (some cursing and profanity)

Reading level: Ages 16 and up

Rating: 3 stars (FAIR)

Reviewed by Wayne S. Walker

For more information e-mail homeschoolbookreview@gmail.com

Twain, Mark. A Connecticut Yankee In King Arthur’s Court (originally published in 1889 by the American Publishing Company, Hartford, CT; republished in 1963 and 2004 by Signet Classics, an imprint of New American Library, a division of Penguin Group USA Inc., 375 Hudson St., New York City, NY 10014). Mark Twain was a good writer. We enjoyed his Adventures of Tom Sawyer and Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, both written with children in mind, and especially his The Prince and the Pauper which is good historical fiction. A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court has been the basis for several films, some of them quite good, but it is neither written with children in mind nor primarily historical, and we did not care for it as much. It is the story of Hank Morgan, a late nineteenth century New Englander who ends up going back to sixth century England during the time of Arthur after being cracked over the head by a crowbar in a fight.

While in Camelot, Hank uses his knowledge of the future to bring early medieval Britain up to the standards of his day, with trains, telephones, and other "modern" conveniences, only to lose it all to the antipathy of the nobility and clergy before somehow being mysteriously transported back to 1800s America where he is pictured as giving the manuscript of his journal to Mark Twain. The story moves a little slowly at times and is occasionally hard to follow. There are references to heavy drinking, gambling, tobacco use, and evolution, and some bad language is found, but not very much (the "d" and "h" words appear a few times, along with the word "Lord" used as an interjection occasionally). Also, mention is made of Queen Guenevere’s illicit romance with Sir Launcelot. The book is heavily anti-clerical, especially anti-Catholic. As I have said before, it is true that the medieval Roman Catholic Church had many instances of corruption, but to overemphasize this tends to leave the impression that all religious people were and are nothing but hypocrites and gives fodder for the claims of atheists against "Christianity."

Though the book was originally intended to present a contrast between Arthurian life and the modern world, it was not designed as a satire. Twain planned to "leave unsmirched and unbelittled the great and beautiful characters drawn by the master hand of old Malory," the author of Le Morte d’Arthur. However, after English critic Matthew Arnold ridiculed American life as vulgar in reviewing Ulysses S. Grant’s Memoirs, Twain turned the book into an attack on British civilization and institutions as not founded on equality, liberty, and humility. The author of the 1963 "Afterword" admitted, "There is no denying that the novel is filled with awkwardness, absurdities, and structural weakness." Something might be learned from the book about life in early medieval times, as well as the need for freedom of thought and the failure of "science" to bring salvation, but it is probably not a book for small children. For youngsters, I would suggest a "Junior Illustrated Classics" type of version.