Steve Blake

Steve Blake (25) reacts after Damian Lillard (0) hit a big three-pointer as the Portland Trail Blazers face the Dallas Mavericks at the Moda Center.

(Bruce Ely, The Oregonian/OregonLive)

To accompany your You be the GM comments and votes, we're also including a roundtable discussion with informed opinions of local beat reporters who cover the Portland Trail Blazers for their take on each player on the roster.

Joe Freeman, The Oregonian/OregonLive

Mike Richman, The Oregonian/OregonLive

Casey Holdahl, TrailBlazers.com

Erik Gundersen, The Columbian

Today, our roundtable answers the following question: Can Steve Blake, heading into his 13th NBA season, serve as a reliable backup point guard for the Blazers next year?

Joe Freeman | @BlazerFreeman: There never was any doubt that Steve Blake would exercise his player option and return to Portland next season. But there was -- and is -- a question about what his role would be. CJ McCollum is primed for significantly more playing time and his ability to play on and off the ball will no doubt eat away some, if not most, of Blake's minutes. The truth is, because so much is in question surrounding the Blazers' roster, it's impossible to predict who will be on the team, let alone what role certain players will have. My hunch is that Blake remains a fringe member of the rotation, filling a lesser role than he did in 2014-15. All-Star Damian Lillard plays so much, there is no need for the Blazers to waste free agent money on a backup point guard when they already have a capable veteran. So, depending on what happens with the free agency of Wesley Matthews and the player option on Arron Afflalo, the Blazers are more apt to chase shooting guards/small forwards than pure point guards. Blake remains a serviceable backup, particularly when playing limited minutes. If he can give the Blazers what he gave them last season and continue to be a quiet-but-effective player -- and I think he can -- they would be elated.

Mike Richman

|

: Steve Blake produced a lot positives in his third stint in Portland. He helped transform the Blazers bench into a an above average unit, he developed a great on-court chemistry with Chris Kaman and he's an absolute pro. However, he's 35 and his production tailed off dramatically towards the end of the season, highlighted by an awful series against the Grizzlies in the playoffs. His three-point shooting numbers were down this season and he's lost a step on defense after 12 seasons in the league. If he continues the downward trend in those two ares the Blazers are better served looking elsewhere for back up point guard help.

The way the team is built the back up point guard needs to function well with Damian Lillard. Blake simply didn't do that. In the most common lineup featuring Lillard and Blake the Blazers were outscored by 5.5 points per 100 possessions. More importantly the Blazers might already have a Blake replacement on the roster in CJ McCollum. While McCollum doesn't possess the true point guard acumen of Blake, he is a better fit next to Lillard and a better offensive player individually than Blake. I assume Blake comes back for another year in Portland, but the team should consider him a minor role next season as opposed to a mainstay in the rotation that he was last season.

Casey Holdahl | @CHold: Steve Blake, in his third stint in Portland, did what the Trail Blazers needed him to do as the team's primary backup at point guard. Perhaps you'd rather he shoot a little higher a percentage from the field and from three, but that's not really why he's out there. Blake's job is to give Damian Lillard a breather, get the bench unit into their offense (the Blazers had their highest assist ratio and assist percentage with Blake on the court), pester the opposing point guard on defense and play with the steady hand that you would expect from a season veteran. Durability was also somewhat of a question mark when he signed as a free agent, though he also played in 81 games this year, more than he's played in the last two seasons combined.

At age 35, one assumes the 2015-16 season with be Blake's last go-round, and while I wouldn't be surprised to see Tim Frazier start to play more of a role off the bench, Blake is still the primary option at backup point. Nothing wrong with that.

Erik Gundersen | @blazerbanter: In a regular season capacity, Steve Blake was more than okay as Portland's back-up point guard. He hit some big shots during the season and paired nicely with Chris Kaman early on in the season. He also was detail-oriented and tough on defense. He probably could be serviceable for another season in that role. But against bigger, more athletic teams, playing Blake may be a bit of a problem as we saw in the playoffs. He had a terrible series against the Grizzlies on both ends. He didn't do very well defensively, which used to be his one of his calling cards, and his Steve Nash-lite forays around the court didn't have the same effect against the Grizzlies that they did in the regular season. His patience quickly became over-dribbling in the playoff setting. Blake may have just had a bad series, but his time in the NBA could also be winding down. He just had the highest turnover rate of his career, turning the ball over on 23.2% of his possessions (yikes). The growth of CJ McCollum, who should be able to take more of the back-up point guard duties, significantly reduces Blake's role. Blake also isn't a great threat to score. It would probably be best for all parties involved if Blake, at his age, to have a little more rest throughout the season and be an emergency point guard. Blake did a good job filling the role of back-up point guard this year but CJ McCollum wasn't yet trusted to fill that role. There is no doubt that McCollum has earned more trust and that should move Blake down the depth chart.