AP Images

Steve Blake will officially be launching three-pointers for the Portland Trail Blazers during the 2014-15 NBA campaign, the team confirmed:

Adrian Wojnarowski of Yahoo Sports initially reported the news:

Ken Berger of CBS Sports reported the terms of Blake's agreement:

In 27 games with the Los Angeles Lakers during the 2013-14 season, Blake averaged 9.5 points, 7.6 assists and 3.8 rebounds a game behind 37.8 percent shooting from the field and 39.7 percent shooting from behind the three-point line. In 28 games with the Golden State Warriors, he posted nightly averages of 4.4 points, 3.6 assists and two rebounds behind 37.5 percent shooting from the field and 34.2 percent shooting from downtown.

The dip in production from Los Angeles to Golden State jumps out immediately and could be a red flag for the Trail Blazers, although he was part of a more crowded backcourt in the latter half of the year and saw substantially fewer minutes with the Dubs.

Even though Blake played fewer minutes for the Warriors, it did little to dampen his enjoyment of his time there if his comments contemplating free agency were any indication, via Diamond Leung of the Bay Area News Group in February:

I can’t lie. I wonder where I’ll be next year. If I had the opportunity to be here, I would love it.

I already knew from the outside that they were a special team. I didn’t realize what a great group of guys it was and how nice it is to play for Coach (Mark) Jackson. Those are all things that I’ll be looking for, for a place I’d like to finish off my career at.

It's unclear if Blake's feelings changed with the firing of Mark Jackson and a first-time head coach in Steve Kerr taking over, but Golden State still has a very talented roster and offered a chance at a serious playoff run.

Ian Begley of ESPN New York also pointed out early in the offseason that the New York Knicks had definitive interest in bringing in the veteran guard:

Blake is 34 years old and something of a journeyman, so his prime is clearly behind him. He has played on seven different NBA teams during his career and served as a teammate to multiple All-Stars (Kobe Bryant certainly comes to mind), so if nothing else, he gives the Trail Blazers some veteran leadership and valuable postseason experience.

Ben Margot/Associated Press

He is a floor general with the ball in his hands and can stroke it from deep if the opposing defense forgets about him. Consistent, veteran leaders at the point guard position are hard to find, and there is value in that in Blake's game, even if he can't explode to the rim like Russell Westbrook.