Even if you don't know the name of Bert Berns, chances are you know the songs he wrote ("Twist and Shout," "I Want Candy," "Hang On, Sloopy," "Piece of My Heart"), produced ("Under the Boardwalk," "Baby I'm Yours," "Brown-Eyed Girl," "Here Comes the Night") and oversaw as head of Bang Records ("Cherry, Cherry," "Solitary Man" and the rest of Neil Diamond's earliest recordings). Though Berns died in the final days of 1967 at just 38 years of age, a year hasn't gone by since when his songs haven't been recorded and played. He finally has gotten his due in recent years with Joel Selvin's biography Here Comes the Night, the off-Broadway bio-musical Piece of My Heart, and most notably with an acclaimed documentary BANG! The Bert Berns Story, directed by Bert's son Brett Berns and Bob Sarles. Earlier this year, the hard-hitting film narrated by Little Steven Van Zandt received a digital-only soundtrack release. Now, that album is on the way from Legacy Recordings in a much more fitting format: vinyl. BANG! The Bert Berns Story: Official Soundtrack arrives as a 2-LP set on December 8, featuring many of the artist who thrived under Berns' imprimatur.

An outcast from a young age, Berns raced against the clock. Rheumatic fever as a child led to the heart condition that would take his life, but he stuffed his 38 years with enough living for a couple of lifetimes. The sound of his records, fusing soul, blues, rock, and pop, owed a considerable debt to his fascination with African-American blues and soul as well as Latin dance rhythms.

The 18 tracks on this soundtrack all pulse with the energy and eclecticism of his native New York City in the 1960s. Among its selections are the original "Piece of My Heart" performed by Erma Franklin and the roof-raising cover by Big Brother and the Holding Company with Janis Joplin; as well as famous selections from Van Morrison ("Chick-a-Boom," "Brown Eyed Girl," and Them's "Here Comes the Night" and "Baby Please Don't Go"), The Isley Brothers ("Twist and Shout"), Solomon Burke ("Everybody Needs Somebody to Love"), The Strangeloves ("I Want Candy"), The Exciters ("Tell Him"), and Garnet Mimms and the Enchanters (the original "Cry Baby"). Lesser-known tunes flesh out the Berns story, including Freddie Scott's "Am I Grooving You," Bobby Harris' "Mr. Success," and Kenny Hamber's "Show Me Your Money." Only Neil Diamond (who declined to participate in the documentary, as well, a likely result of lingering - and perhaps justified - resentments against Berns) is conspicuous by his absence.

BANG! The Bert Berns Story: Official Soundtrack chronicles Berns' life through his electrifying art, and proves his immense contribution to the sound of rock and soul. Look for it on December 8 on vinyl from Legacy Recordings!

BANG! The Bert Berns Story: Official Soundtrack (Legacy Recordings, 2017) (Amazon U.S. / Amazon U.K. / Amazon Canada)

Piece of My Heart - Erma Franklin

A Little Bit of Soap - The Jarmels

Tell Him - The Exciters

Twist and Shout - The Isley Brothers

Cry Baby - Garnet Mimms and The Enchanters

Show Me Your Monkey - Kenny Hamber

Baby, Please Don't Go - Them

You May Be Holding My Baby - The Pussycats

Everybody Needs Somebody to Love - Solomon Burke

Here Comes the Night - Them

I Want Candy - The Strangeloves

Are You Lonely For Me Baby - Freddie Scott

Mr. Success - Bobby Harris

Chick-a-Boom - Van Morrison

Hang on Sloopy - The McCoys

Cry to Me - Freddie Scott

Brown-Eyed Girl - Van Morrison

Am I Grooving You - Freddie Scott

Heart Be Still - Lorraine Ellison

Piece of My Heart - Big Brother and the Holding Company feat. Janis Joplin

Joe Marchese

JOE MARCHESE (Editor) joined The Second Disc shortly after its launch in early 2010, and has since penned daily news and reviews about classic music of all genres. In 2015, Joe formed the Second Disc Records label. Celebrating the great songwriters, producers and artists who created the sound of American popular song, Second Disc Records, in conjunction with Real Gone Music, has released newly-curated collections produced by Joe from iconic artists such as Johnny Mathis, Bobby Darin, Laura Nyro, Melissa Manchester, Chet Atkins, and many others. He has contributed liner notes to reissues from a diverse array of artists, among them Nat "King" Cole, Paul Williams, Lesley Gore, Dusty Springfield, B.J. Thomas, The 5th Dimension, Burt Bacharach, The Mamas and the Papas, Carpenters, Perry Como, Rod McKuen, Doris Day, Jackie DeShannon, and Andy Williams, and has compiled releases for talents including Robert Goulet and Keith Allison of Paul Revere and the Raiders. Over the past two decades, Joe has also worked in a variety of capacities on and off Broadway as well as at some of the premier theatres in the U.S., including Lincoln Center Theater, George Street Playhouse, Paper Mill Playhouse, Long Wharf Theatre, and the York Theatre Company. He has felt privileged to work on productions alongside artists such as the late Jack Klugman, Eli Wallach, Arthur Laurents, Betty Comden and Adolph Green. In 2009, Joe began contributing theatre and music reviews to the print publication The Sondheim Review, and in 2012, he joined the staff of The Digital Bits as a regular contributor writing about film and television on DVD and Blu-ray. Joe currently resides in the suburbs of New York City.