Yumurí Valley

Considered one of the most beautiful landscapes of Cuba. From the lookout of Bacunayagua, you can see all the splendor of the valley. There are tracings of different ecotourism trails, which lead to an old aboriginal settlement, a farm of flower crops and the inlet of the Bacunayagua river, where the visitor can take a dip, right at the mouth of this fluvial stream.

Sauto Theater

Founded on April 6th, 1863, declared National Monument. It is one of the most famous institutions in Latin America. The style of its architecture is neoclassical and is characterized by its magnificent acoustics.

Canimar River and Natural Park

Around the Canimar River, one of the deepest in Cuba, there is a park that invites visitors to enjoy its peaceful natural beauty with horse or boat rides or fishing and snorkelling excursions. The river flows into the bay of Matanzas next to the Morrillo Castle, built in 1720.

Ciénaga de Zapata

Declared a Biosphere Reserve by UNESCO, the Cienaga de Zapata is the mayor of the insular Caribbean wetland, with an extended area of about 300 thousand hectares. It has one of the largest forest reserves in the country, with around 78 species of endemic plants and numerous animals. It also has more than 200 species of birds, many of them endemic and considered the largest reservoir of migratory birds in Cuba.

Girón Beach

Located in one of the largest wetlands in the world, Playa Girón is a wonderful beach, ideal for practicing various water activities, including snorkeling and diving. It went down in history in 1961, when it was chosen as one of the landing points for the Bay of Pigs invasion.

Pharmaceutical Museum of Matanzas

Founded in 1882, this pharmacy was the first of its kind to be built in Latin America and the only one that remains in the world. Built in the 19th century, it preserves its furniture and instruments in perfect condition, among which stand out the original elements of the French apothecary, shelves, utensils, instruments, flasks, prescriptions made by relevant physicians from the city of Matanzas and many collections of instruments used at the time.