How does the verb trespass differ from other similar words?

Some common synonyms of trespass are encroach, infringe, and invade. While all these words mean "to make inroads upon the property, territory, or rights of another," trespass implies an unwarranted or unlawful intrusion.

hunters trespassing on farmland

When is it sensible to use encroach instead of trespass?

The words encroach and trespass are synonyms, but do differ in nuance. Specifically, encroach suggests gradual or stealthy entrance upon another's territory or usurpation of another's rights or possessions.

the encroaching settlers displacing the native peoples

When can infringe be used instead of trespass?

In some situations, the words infringe and trespass are roughly equivalent. However, infringe implies an encroachment clearly violating a right or prerogative.

infringing a copyright

When is invade a more appropriate choice than trespass?

The meanings of invade and trespass largely overlap; however, invade implies a hostile and injurious entry into the territory or sphere of another.

accused of invading their privacy

Recent Examples on the Web

Noun

State police said the teen was taken to Troop D, where he was processed and charged with second-degree criminal trespass, first-degree criminal mischief, sixth-degree larceny, second-degree breach of peace, interference with a cemetery. —Staff Report, Hartford Courant, 15 July 2024 All were charged with criminal mischief, criminal trespass and breach of peace. —CBS News, 23 June 2024

Verb

The latter reported that Guiry had trespassed onto his property and damaged a Jeep’s windshield by using a 35-pound dumbbell weight. —Jack Smart, Peoplemag, 21 June 2024 The suit alleged that the oil trains often had 100 cars, and accused BNSF of intentionally trespassing on tribal land. —Elizabeth Campbell, Fort Worth Star-Telegram, 18 June 2024 See all Example Sentences for trespass

These examples are programmatically compiled from various online sources to illustrate current usage of the word 'trespass.' Any opinions expressed in the examples do not represent those of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback about these examples.