The weekend began with two demonstrations on Friday evening. About 1,000 people marched to protest a planned free-trade pact between the European Union and the United States. Meanwhile, there was a much smaller anti-austerity protest, a repeat of one held outside Parliament House in April. Once again, demonstrators tried to climb the steps of the legislature, this time knocking over a fence that police had erected to keep them out. An estimated 200 people took part.

Spring cleaning and bargain-hunting

On Saturday, there should be a more peaceful mood as thousands of city residents sell or give away unwanted items on sidewalks and in yards and parks. The annual Cleaning Day event turns some neighbourhoods into informal flea markets.

The slightly-bohemian Kumpula district hosts its annual neighbourhood festival on Saturday, too. This extravaganza features music from the likes of Yona, Damn Seagulls, Pariisin kevät and two big Finnish names from the ‘70’s: pop singer Freeman and a reunion of prog band Wigwam. Along with speakers, comedians and kiddie activities, there is also naturally an array of food and drink including a temporary Kenya Café at Limingantie 8, serving lentil soup, buns and coffee with the proceeds going to benefit schoolchildren in Kenya.

It takes a village

Yet the biggest show in town is the free World Village Festival at Kaisaniemi Park, which spills over into the adjacent Railway Square. Again there is plenty of music: mostly Latin this year, along with Finnish bands and South African jazz sounds from trumpeter Hugh Masekela, known for hits such as 1968’s “Grazing in the Grass”.

And there’s food, from just about any country or culture you can think of. Also on offer are dance shows and workshops, a children’s tent, and talks, readings and panel discussions on weighty global issues hosted by dozens of NGOs.

Ballet and beer

After you’ve had your fill of multi-culturalism and consciousness-raising, head over to the Opera House where the Finnish National Ballet wraps up with two evenings featuring the troupe’s artistic director, Danish choreographer Kenneth Greve, appearing as a dancer himself for the first time in Finland. His “Kenneth and Friends” events on Saturday and Sunday spotlights guest dancers from the Stuttgart Ballet, the San Francisco Ballet, the Paris Opera Ballet, the Royal Ballet and the English National Ballet.

Many will instead end up at one of the city’s watering holes to watch the Finnish men’s ice hockey team play the Czech Republic in a World Championships semi-final. That game begins at 6.45 pm – and could lead to a final or at least a bronze match on Sunday. With highs of 25 degrees Celsius predicted for Saturday and Sunday, keeping an eye on the ice may be just the thing.