Adam Kotsko, Agamben’s Philosophical Trajectory – Edinburgh University Press, September 2020 Good to see this book nearly out – a major study by the key translator of Agamben into English. Adam has a great story about the project – Academic … Continue reading →

A few pieces by geographers, sociologists and philosophers – presented without commentary [Update: an updated list is available here – thanks to people for sending additional links. I’ll try to keep that page updated as I see more] Michele Lancione and Abdoumaliq … Continue reading →

Law and Humanities Summer School, University of Hong Kong, 8-13 June 2020 The Faculty of Law and the Faculty of Arts at the University of Hong Kong will hold its first law and humanities summer school, 8-13 June 2020. This … Continue reading →

Boštjan Nedoh, Ontology and Perversion: Deleuze, Agamben, Lacan – Rowman International, June 2019 This book examines the philosophical and political relevance of perversion in the works of three key representatives of contemporary philosophy and psychoanalysis: Gilles Deleuze, Giorgio Agamben and … Continue reading →

Mainly older works by Agamben, Deleuze, Derrida, and Foucault, but also some other books, including James Tyner, Dead Labor: Towards a Political Economy of Premature Death, Michèle H. Richman, Sacred Revolutions: Durkheim and the Collège de Sociologie and Erin Felicia Labbie, Lacan’s … Continue reading →

Some books in recompense for review work for Stanford University Press – Derrida’s Monolingualism of the Other and Paper Machine; Giorgio Agamben, The Use of Bodies; François Delaporte, Anatomy of the Passions and Mark D. Jordan, Convulsing Bodies: Religion and Resistance in Foucault.

Giorgio Agamben, Stasis: Civil War as a Political Paradigm; All’s Well That Ends Well (the penultimate volume of the Arden Shakespeare, third series), Dominique Lecourt, Proletarian Science; Georges Bataille, The Absence of Myth; Francisco Vitale, Biodeconstruction: Jacques Derrida and the … Continue reading →

5 Critical Theory books from August 2017 – a useful roundup of Agamben, Kleinberg, Morton, Johnson and Lubin, and Evangelou.

Nicole Loraux’s essay “War in the Family” has been translated by Adam Kotsko, and is open access in the new issue of Parrhesia. As Adam writes, “This previously untranslated essay is discussed at length in the first half of Agamben’s … Continue reading →