Edimo Ferreira Campos, commonly known as Edinho, is a Brazilian former professional footballer who played as a defensive midfielder.

Edinho was born on January 15, 1983, in Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. His birth geographical coordinates are 22° 52’ 60” South latitude and 43° 6’ 13” West longitude. Edinho is currently 41 years old.

Astrologically, Edinho falls under the Sun sign of Capricorn, with Aries as his Ascendant, Aquarius as his Moon sign, and Capricorn as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Capricorn Moon Aquarius Mercury Capricorn Venus Aquarius Mars Aquarius Jupiter Sagittarius Saturn Scorpio Uranus Sagittarius Neptune Sagittarius Pluto Libra Ceres Capricorn Chiron Taurus Eros Aquarius Hygiea Libra Juno Aquarius Pallas Sagittarius Vesta Pisces Ascendant Aries Black Moon Lilith Capricorn Midheaven Capricorn North Node Cancer South Node Capricorn Part of Fortune Taurus Vertex Capricorn

Sunin Capricorn24° 54’ 4”

The Sun in Capricorn in a Natal Chart is a placement associated with patience and reliability. You are consistent and preserve tradition. You look to […] Read more »

Moonin Aquarius10° 22’ 37”

The Moon in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you a humanitarian with instincts related to fairness and equality. You are intuitively attracted to group […] Read more »

Mercuryin Capricorn26° 5’ 40”

Mercury in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you eager to express your ideas about money, finance, and career. You often think of investments and […] Read more »

Venusin Aquarius12° 23’ 7”

Aquarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you unusual and brilliant. You value people who inspire breakthroughs. You love epiphanies that help you understand the […] Read more »

Marsin Aquarius28° 29’ 54”

Aquarius Mars in the Natal Chart makes you daring and impulsive. You are passionate and can follow your intellectual desires. You are inspiring and want […] Read more »

Jupiterin Sagittarius3° 54’ 22”

Sagittarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that values spiritual growth and expansion. You are a truth-seeker and are […] Read more »

Saturnin Scorpio3° 45’ 56”

Is Saturn in Scorpio good or bad? Scorpio Saturn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with security and power. […] Read more »

Uranusin Sagittarius7° 40’ 42”

Uranus in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart is a generational placement, describing a broad cohort of people born within three years of each other. You […] Read more »

Neptunein Sagittarius27° 46’ 44”

Sagittarius Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to help society expand. You help others grow and push boundaries. […] Read more »

Plutoin Libra29° 26’ 51”

Pluto in Libra in the Natal Chart indicates a generation devoted to exposing corruption within the legal system. You help society transform how it creates […] Read more »

Ceresin Capricorn14° 38’ 29”

Ceres in Capricorn in the Natal Chart indicates a generation committed to making others comfortable. You are sensitive to others’ needs and can be compassionate […] Read more »

Chironin Taurus22° 48’ 15”

Chiron in Taurus in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a nurturing healer. Your generation brings attention to financial and physical wellness. You […] Read more »

Erosin Aquarius4° 22’ 9”

Eros in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you eager to explore your kinky side. You are excited by dramatic and creative sexual experiences. You […] Read more »

Hygieain Libra27° 10’ 11”

Hygiea in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you peace-loving and harmonious. You maintain your health by being conscious of balance. You are empathetic and […] Read more »

Junoin Aquarius5° 42’ 29”

Aquarius Juno in the Natal Chart indicates you have an intellectual and creative connection to your love interest. You have a rebellious spirit and can […] Read more »

Pallasin Sagittarius24° 51’ 10”

Pallas in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are generous and can be a natural leader who inspires others to […] Read more »

Vestain Pisces13° 36’ 36”

Vesta in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you endearing and romantic. You are sensitive and obsessed with spiritual growth. You delve into the occult […] Read more »

Ascendantin Aries24° 11’ 4”

Aries Ascendant in the Natal Chart indicates a dramatic personality. You have a passionate appearance and often go to extremes to show your individuality. You […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Capricorn23° 8’ 35”

Capricorn Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and independent in your career. Your business strategies are wild and based on your […] Read more »

Midheavenin Capricorn24° 28’ 39”

The Capricorn Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you stoic and observant. You are patient and down to earth. You have a practical and determined […] Read more »

North Nodein Cancer3° 4’ 56”

Cancer Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you maternal and caring. You take others under your wing and can be compassionate and loving. You are […] Read more »

South Nodein Capricorn3° 4’ 56”

Capricorn South Node in the Natal Chart makes you dependable and committed. You are reliable and have a gift for maintaining stability. You can be […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Tenth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Tenth House Mars Eleventh House Jupiter Eighth House Saturn Seventh House Uranus Eighth House Neptune Ninth House Pluto Seventh House Ceres Ninth House Chiron First House Eros Tenth House Hygiea Seventh House Juno Tenth House Pallas Ninth House Vesta Eleventh House Black Moon Lilith Ninth House North Node Third House South Node Ninth House Part of Fortune First House Vertex Ninth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 15 major aspects, alongside 13 minor aspects, as well as 9 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Conjunct Mercury Mars Sextile Neptune Mars Trine Pluto Moon Conjunct Venus Neptune Sextile Pluto Moon Sextile Uranus Mercury Square Pluto Jupiter Conjunct Uranus Saturn Conjunct Pluto Sun Square Pluto Venus Sextile Uranus Mars Square Jupiter Mars Trine Saturn Saturn Sextile Neptune Moon Square Saturn

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Edinho ‘s life journey.

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 1°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Moon Conjunct Venusorb: 2°

The Moon conjunct Venus helps you express your emotional nature through the visual and performing arts. You are idealistic and see the beauty in others. […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Uranusorb: 3°

When the Moon is sextile Uranus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is free-spirited, unique, and a bit rebellious. Someone with […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Uranusorb: 4°

Jupiter conjunct Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone craves freedom and needs to try new things constantly. There are both positive and negative […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Plutoorb: 4°

Saturn conjunct Pluto in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person has faced, or will face, some intense hardships. These might be experienced while […] Read more »

Sun Square Plutoorb: 5°

The Sun square Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you fearful of change and loss. Until you accept core fears and weaknesses, you may overcompensate […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Uranusorb: 5°

Venus sextile Uranus in a chart typically indicates that a person is open-minded, artistic, and innovative. They are likely noticeably unique or different in some […] Read more »

Moon Square Saturnorb: 7°

The Moon square Saturn in a Natal Chart typically creates controlling tendencies in a person. Depending on how this is expressed, people might be more […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Conjunct Midheaven Jupiter Sextile Eros Sun Square Ascendant Moon Square Part of Fortune Mercury Square Hygiea Mars Trine Hygiea Jupiter Quincunx North Node Saturn Square Eros Saturn Trine North Node Saturn Sextile South Node Neptune Sextile Hygiea Sun Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Mercury Conjunct Midheaven

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Edinho ‘s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 0°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Sun Square Ascendantorb: 1°

The Sun square Ascendant in the Natal Chart creates friction between your identity and outer appearance. Your first impressions don’t align with your authentic self. […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx North Nodeorb: 1°

Jupiter quincunx the North Node in a chart disconnects growth and destiny. It can be difficult for a person to find their true path and […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Black Moon Lilithorb: 2°

Novice astrologers often ask, what does Black Moon Lilith mean? This fixed point in the chart indicates your potential to unleash pent-up power and frustration […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 2°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Trine Black Moon Lilith Ascendant Square Midheaven Ceres Sextile Vesta Ceres Conjunct Vertex Eros Conjunct Juno Pallas Trine Ascendant Ascendant Square Black Moon Lilith Black Moon Lilith Conjunct Midheaven Chiron Trine Midheaven

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Edinho ‘s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Ceres Conjunct Vertexorb: 1°

Ceres conjunct the Vertex in a chart combines someone’s nurturing tendencies with their fate and destiny. How they are nurtured and show care to others […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.