Bruce Bennett/Getty Images

History was made on Sunday, April 28, 2013, as Tampa Bay Lightning right wing Martin St. Louis became the oldest player in NHL history to win the scoring title.

St. Louis is 37 years old and in the midst of his 14th season in the National Hockey League. With a goal and an assist against the Florida Panthers on April 27, St. Louis pushed his scoring total to 60 points in 48 games played with 17 goals and 43 assists.

St. Louis barely edged out the likes of Pittsburgh Penguins center Sidney Crosby, Washington Capitals left wing Alex Ovechkin and fellow Lightning teammate Steven Stamkos.

This is St. Louis' second Art Ross Trophy after winning the honor during the 2003-04 regular season.

During his magical 2003-04 campaign, St. Louis not only won the Art Ross Trophy, but the Hart Memorial Trophy and the Stanley Cup, as well. Unfortunately, the Tampa Bay Lightning failed to qualify for the postseason in 2012-13 and our leader in points will be forced to watch from home.

That may be more disappointing to fans looking for great NHL action than to St. Louis himself.

Nevertheless, this is a feat to cherish for the 37-year-old right wing. With that being said, we can't help but wonder how far the statistics can carry him.

Will the scoring and assists title be enough to win St. Louis the MVP award?

On top of leading the NHL in points, St. Louis also topped the list in assists for the second time in his career. St. Louis' 43 assists were two more than Crosby, who has been absent since March 30 after suffering a broken jaw.

With Crosby out, is there really an individual better than St. Louis was in 2013?

After winning the 2004 MVP award, St. Louis clearly has the reputation necessary to warrant attention from the voters. By leading the league in points and assists, he also has the production and backstory as a 37-year-old outperforming the young guns.

In what may be a sign of things to come, the NHL's points leader has won the Hart Memorial Trophy in two of the past three seasons.