Charles ADAMS

At Akron, Ohio, June 17th, of typhoid fever, Mr. Charles Adams, formerly a resident of Prattsville, aged 38 years. [The Catskill Recorder, Catskill, NY, June 30, 1871, p. 3; transcribed by J. Swanson]

Hon. Alanson BARLOW

Aug. 28, (1858) ae. 77, Ashland, N.Y., (father of Allen Barlow, of Binghampton), and Mrs. MARY ANN BARLOW, wife of Hon. A.B., May 11, ae. 70. Mr. Barlow belonged to a family whose members have done the state some service. He was a nephew of Joel Barlow, of revolutionary memory, who deserves honorable mention among the statesmen and men of letters of that period. His “Columbiad” is still the only American national epic, the only example of a poet daring to celebrate in heroic verse contemporary or recent historic events. As a politician he ranked among the leading men of the organizing epoch of this government. He was the friend and coadjutor of Madison and Jefferson, to whose school of politics he belonged, or rather helped to found. His death was occasioned by the fatigue of a forced journey to join Napoleon, in council at Wilna, in Poland. In personal appearance Alanson Barlow much resembled his uncle, judging by the portrait in the Cyclopedia of American Literature. There was inherited, also, the diplomatist's inflexibility of purpose, his profound reserve of manner and of expression – a man of more thought than speech, giving one the impression of a plain, solid cast of character, in keeping with his robust and iron frame; a man whose word was a bond; trespassing a hair's breadth upon no man's rights; not wearing his heart upon his sleeve – a friendly but deep-seated heart. Though rarely expressing personal interest in spiritual truth, unless drawn to it by others, yet his manual of devotion was found in many places literally worn away, though it had not been long in use. The biography of Mrs. B., in its main features, would be that of the early inhabitants of this region, a generation of energetic men and women, exchanging the refinement and culture of New England for lonely homes in this then wilderness. They derived from their frugal and simple habits a hardiness of constitution, an elastic vigor of frame, a power of enduring the rigors and changes of this austere climate – nature's compensations to the pioneers of civilization. They are gone. The husband, the father, venerable judge – the friend, the wife, the mother, the Christian – have bowed to the common lot. The torn fibers of the disturbed soil have knit together again above their place of rest. Thus the links that bind us to the past are broken. The outlook is toward the future, and the future is eternity. [Source: Annual OBITUARY NOTICES OF EMINENT PERSONS who have died in the United States FOR 1858; BY HON. NATHAN CROSBY; BOSTON: JOHN P. JEWETT AND COMPANY. 1859. Transcribed by K. Mohler].

Martha BENNETT

Green Co., N.Y., Aug. ___, ae. 76, widow of P.W. Bennett, mother of T.R. Bennett, inspector of the 18th precinct police, New York city. Mrs. B. was a noble-minded woman, and much beloved by a large circle of friends. She was born in Newark, N.J. At the commencement of the revolutionary war her father, John Chesters, was seized by a gang of bandits in England, and brought to New York city against his will, for the purpose of fighting the Americans. His father, William Chesters, despatched a man to America with $200 to ransom the captive; but the British officer to whom the application was made detained both money and agent, and gave John 25 lashes on the bare back for asking to be set at liberty. Young Chesters then deserted, taking with him his horse and such things as he could conveniently carry; and, sympathizing with the Americans in their struggle for liberty, lost no time in joining the American army. He was one of Gen. Washington's main men, and, after faithfully serving his adopted country for seven years, received an honorable discharge, with a medal. During the struggle for liberty by the Americans, young Chesters, then only 19 years of age, with four others, was watching one night for smugglers on the banks of the Passaic River, when they were surprised by a body of British soldiers, who had landed with the intention of taking Newark. Chesters and his companions, seeing that resistance against such powerful odds were useless, fled for their lives; but three of them were overtaken and murdered. John succeeded in gaining the court house, and, while entering the door, three bullets were fired at him; but, fortunately, they lodged in the door without doing further damage. Chesters sounded the alarm to Generals Ray, Knox and Cummings, then asleep in a hotel near by, who instantly marshaled their forces, and saved the town. Incensed at their defeat, the British offered a large reward for young Chesters's head, which, however, they did not get. He died in Newark, when only 30 years of age. [Source: Annual OBITUARY NOTICES OF EMINENT PERSONS who have died in the United States FOR 1858; BY HON. NATHAN CROSBY; BOSTON: JOHN P. JEWETT AND COMPANY. 1859. Transcribed by Kim Mohler.]

Jennie F. BISHOP

BISHOP—At Coxsackie, N.Y. January 29, 1939, Jennie Fuchett, wife of Schuyler C. Bi shop. The funeral will be held from her late residence February 1, at 2 p. m. Friends may call Tuesday evening. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Monday January 30, 1939. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Patrick J. BLAKE

Died, Suddenly at Catskill. N.Y., Tuesday, June 5, 1928. Patrick J. Blake of Kingston. N.Y., father of Morris and Lawrence Blake. Funeral services Friday, June 8, at 8:45 a.m. from the James M. Murphy undertaking parlors. 174 Broadway, and at 9:30 at St. Joseph's Church where a high Mass of requiem will be offered for the repose of his soul. Interment in the family plot in St. Mary's cemetery. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Thursday June 7, 1928. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

William J. BODLEY

BODLEY SHOT

Boy Found on Railroad Track With Bullet in Head

William J. Bodley, 13, son of Joseph Bodley of Cementon, died at Catskill Sunday night from a bullet wound in his head. It is not known how Bodley was shot. He was found by Clinton Moore, nightwatchman at the Alpha Portland Cement Company, lying unconscious on the company's spur on the West Shore railroad with a bullet hole in his forehead. Moore took the boy to his home and Dr. Dean W. Jennings of Catskill was summoned. They boy died a short time after his arrival at Catskill. Coroner William M. Rapp and Distict Attorney H. McK. Curtis conducted an investigation, which revealed that the boy had been playing with a number of his comrades earlier in the afternoon. The autopsy showed the wound was made by a 31 calibre bullet.

James Ferrase, 12, one of Bodley's playmates, was arrested and taken to Catskill, but was released Monday morning. Ferrase hase a 22 calibre rifle, but he has proven he was not connected with the affair. An inquest will take place today. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Tuesday, October 1, 1918. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Esther BONK

Twenty and Ten Years Ago

July 13, 1896 - Body of Miss Esther Bonk, who died in Catskill, brought here for burial. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Thursday, July 13, 1916. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Stephen CODDINGTON

—The remains of Stephen Coddington arrived here on the O. & W. train 1 to-day, f or burial at Walker Valley. The deceased, who was 38 years of age, died at new Baltimore on the 4th inst. [Middletown Daily News - Wednesday May 6, 1891. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Apollos COOK

Cook, Apollos, of Catskill, d. 23 July 1832, after being thrown from his horse at Windham, about 30 miles west of Catskill. (28 July 1832) [Source: Vital Records From The National Intelligencer, by George A. Martin; transcribed by V. Bryan]

Margaret DEDERICK

Margaret Dederick, a native of the town of Saugerties, died at Catskill Saturday, February 7, aged 68 years. She is survived by one brother, Henry Dederick of Brooklyn, and two sisters, Mrs. Mary Bates of Catskill and Mrs. Katherine Finger of Mt. Marion. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Thursday, February 12, 1923. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Emory DINGEE

Montgomery. Aug. 22—Emory Dingee died in Palenville on Sunday, of can cer of the stomach, aged about 41 years. He conducted a hotel in that place and at one time a hotel in Burlingham.The body was brought to this place on Monday, w here funeral services were held Tuesday in the Methodist Church.He is survive d by his wife, was Miss Hattie Babcock, of this place, and the following children: Misses Hattie, Pearl, Viola and Emory.Interment was in the Riverside Cemetery in this village. [Middletown Times Press - August 22, 1917. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Ezekiel EADS

A Man Without Ears

Ezekiel Eads, who died in Greene county New York, in the spring of 1885, was surely a fit subject for a dime museum, even though he never descended to that level. Strictly speaking, Eads was in several respects a most remarkable creature. He was born without ears, not even having apertures where his ears should have been. His deformity, sad as it was, may be said to have been partly alleviated by the [undecipherable] construction of the inner portion of his head, which enabled him to hear common conversation through his mouth.When addressed he would instantly open his mouth and readily give answers to interrogations put to him in an ordinary tone of voice. But Ezekiel's lack of ears was not his only distinction. He had a heavy crop of black hair spotted with white, the spots themselves being in the exact shape of human ears, feet, hands, etc. When he was quite a small baby it was noticed that his black hair was interspersed with oddly shaped spots of white, which, however, did not take on their distinctive shapes until after he had passed his fifteenth year.When Mr. Eads died he left one son, aged forty-five, whose hair was as black as coal, not a single gray hair being discernible, and another son, thirteen years of age, whose hair was as gray as that of a man of seventy.—Wheeling (W. Va.) Register. [Hornellsville Weekly Tribune - Fr iday, January 29, 1892 Hornellsville, New York. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Charles O. DAY

Class of 1901 - CHARLES ORRIN DAY. D.D.; A.B., Yale, 1872; And. Theol. Sem., 1877; LL.D., Norwich Univ., 1901; also M.A., Yale. B. 8 Nov., 1851, Catskill, N.Y. Clergyman and teacher. Pres. and Prof. Prac. Theol., And. Theol. Sem., 1901-08. Chaplain 1st Vt. Vols., 1898. D. 5 Apr., 1910, Andover, Mass. [Source: "Dartmouth College Necrology, 1909-1 910, Hanover, N.H. Transcribed by Kim Mohler]

Cark L. GRIFFIN

Cark Lester, son of Mr. and Mrs. LeRoy Griffin, died in Coxsackie on Sunday morning. The body will be brought to this city on Wednesday morning on the 11:45 o'clock West Shore train for internment in Montrepose cemetery. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Monday July, 19, 1915. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

John S. HARDICK

In Catskill, June 28th, John S. Hardick, aged 28 years. Friends and acquaintenance are invited to attend his funeral this (Friday) afternoon, at 3 o'clock, from his residence, on York St. G. H. Hanford's Catskill Cornet Band are respectfully invited to attend. [The Catskill Recorder, Catskill, NY, June 30, 1871, p. 3; transcribed by J. Swanson]

Mary B. HILL

Twenty and Ten Years Ago

July 8, 1928 - Mrs. Mary B. Hill died at Palenville. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Friday July 8, 1938. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Gamalia H. HUGGINS

Twenty and Ten Years Ago

Sept. 12, 1919 Mrs. Gamalia H. Huggins died at Prattsville. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Tuesday, July 19, 1938 Kingston, New York. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Joseph KALSCH

Joseph Kalsch of Brooklyn, a sufferor from gangrene in both feet, died at Palenville Wednesday, July 28th, aged 58 years. The body was shipped via W.S.R.R. train 11:18 Thursday morning to his late home. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Friday July 29, 1921. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez]

Amasa KEITH

In this Village, at the residence of his son-in-law, Gen Geo. Beach, June 22d, Mr. Amasa Keith, in the 82d year of his age. [The Catskill Recorder, Catskill, NY, June 30, 1871, p. 3; transcribed by J. Swanson]

Rufus H. KING

Hon. RUFUS H. KING, of Catskill, New York, died there at his home on Broad Street, September 13, 1890. His ancestry may be traced as follows: Elder Thomas King, the founder of the family in New England, was a resident of Scituate, Mass., as early as 1634. He was thrice married. By his first wife, Sarah, he had six children. He left an interesting will dated 1691. Deacon Thomas King, second son of Elder Thomas, born 1645, married (1) Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Clapp, by whom he had five sons and four daughters. She died in 1698, and the next year he married (2) Deborah Briggs, who died in 1711. Thomas died the same year, leaving a will. Ichabod King, fourth son of Thomas, was born in Scituate in 1680, and died in Rochester, Plymouth County, Mass., in 1753. He had three wives, (1) Hannah ──, (2) Judith, widow of Job Gibbs, and (3) Mary Barlow, and ten children. Ebenezer King, second son of Ichabod, had by his first wife, Sarah, three children. Consider King, son of Ebenezer, was born in Freetown, Mass., May 13, 1738, and married Sarah Palmer, September 1, 1760. He died March 16, 1786. Reuben King, third son of Consider, was born in Rochester, Mass., March 22, 1765; married Elizabeth Frisbee, and had eight children. Rufus King, the eldest son of Reuben, born June 1, 1791, in Rensselaerville, Albany County, New York; married January 6, 1818, Mary, daughter of Nicholas and Hannah (Sisson) Cornell, and died May 21, 1821. He had two children. Hon. Rufus H. King, the subject of this memoir, was the only son of Rufus preceding, and was born in Rensselaerville, January 20, 1820. He was a graduate of the Wesleyan University at Lima, New York, and began the study of law with an uncle in Michigan, continuing the same with Danforth K. Olney at Windham, later on with Peter H. Sylvester at Coxsackie. Mr. King was admitted to the bar in 1845, and began the practice of law at Coxsackie in partnership with J. C. Van Dyke. He was married the same year to Lucia H. Dwight, of Windham, who survives him. They had no children. In 1847 Mr. King removed to Catskill, where he entered into partnership with John Adams. Upon the death of Mr. Adams, Mr. King became associated with Peleg C. Mattoon, and afterward with D. K. and J. B. Olney. After J. B. Olney's death, the firm became Olney & King, and later on King & Hallock─Joseph Hallock having taken the place made vacant by the death of D. K. Olney. This partnership continued until April 19, 1880, when Mr. King withdrew from the practice of law. He did not cease, however, to take an active interest in business affairs, and became trustee of a number of large estates, President of the Catskill Savings Bank, and Director in other institutions. Mr. King was in politics a Whig and afterward a Republican. In 1854 he was elected to the 34th Congress from his district. In 1860 he was one of the Presidential electors of Lincoln and Hamlin. In 1865 he was made President of the Catskill National Bank, and served for two years. In 1880 he was a delegate to the Republican National Convention, and supported the nomination of General Grant for President. Mr. King was greatly interested in the affairs of his own town, and ever ready to aid any plan for its improvement. He was a member of the Presbyterian church, and the funeral services were held there, the Rev. Dr. Johnson, of Cohoes, an old friend of Mr. King's, with others, conducting the service. The interment was in the village cemetery. Members of the Greene County bar met at the court house on September 16, to honor Mr. King's memory, and many tributes were paid to his acknowledged worth. The Trustees of the Catskill Savings Bank and the Directors of the Tanners' National Bank also passed appropriate resolutions. The particulars of ceremonies have been preserved in a memorial pamphlet, a copy of which has been placed in the library of the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society. ─ R. K. [Source: The New York Genealogical and Biographical Record; Vol. 22; 1891. New York Genealogical and Biographical Society. Transcribed by CNP]

Theodosia S. KINSLEY

Miss Theodosia Strong Kinsley died yesterday afternoon at 1:30 o'clock at the home of her brother-in-law, Mr. H.R. Wilcox, No. 23 Railroad avenue this city, aged nearly 60 years.Miss Kinsley was born in Ashland, Greene county, N.Y., and was the second daughter of Hon. Henry Kinsley and Olivia Strong. Her father died in 1859. About a year after that event she came to Middletown and made her home with her sister, who ever since has watched over and cared for her with a devotion seldom equalled. Mrs. Wilcox is the only member of the family surviving. One sister died in infancy and the only brother, Henry Kinsley, died in Ashland, the spring of 1891. Miss Kinsley was delicate from a child and had been an inv alid the greater part of her life. For the past nineteen years she had been totally blind. She had been gradually failing in health the past year but nothing alarming developed until Wednesday of this week when she grew suddenly worse and sank rapidly till the end.In her early life she was a great reader and her fondness for books and newspapers made listening to reading one of her chief pastimes, after her blindness came. She was of a very gentle and

affectionate nature and bore her long years of afliction with patience. Her death was as peaceful as her life had been quiet and uneventful. The funeral will be held Monday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the house of H.R. Wilcox. Burial will be in Hillside. [Middletown Daily Press - Saturday, July 29, 1893 Middletown, New York. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Joseph KOST

Joseph Kost died at Prattsville, N.Y., Sunday. He was a native of South America, aged 28 years. Remains are at the funeral parlors of Leo V. Grogan, No. 37 Clinton avenue. Notice of funeral later. [Kingston Daily Freeman -Monday, October 31, 1921 Kingston, New York. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Elmer KREIGER

Ex-Supervisor Elmer Kreiger, well known in this city, died at his home in Prattsville, Greene county, N.Y., Sunday evening, June 2nd, aged 60 years. Mr. Kreiger represented the town of Prattsville in the Greene county board of supervisors for twenty-three years, being chairman of the committee that built the new court house and jail at Catskill. Owing to failing health he refused a re-nomination for supervisors last fall. Mr. Kreiger was a member of the Oasis Lodge of Masons, Prattsville, Mountain Chapter of R.A.M. Windham and Rondoul Commandery. He is survived by his wife, a sister and two brothers. The funeral will be held from his late residence at Prattsville, Wednesday afternoon at 1 o'clock, and will be in charge of Rondout Commandery. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Tuesday, June 04, 1918 Kingston, New York. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Harry T. LYDECKER

Harry T. Lydecker of Catskill, who was a member of the old Company M, First Regiment, of this city, which served during the Spanish AMerican War, died at Catskill on Saturday, March 28, at Woodmen, Colorado, where he had been receiving treatment for the past five months at tbe Woodmen's Sanitarium. He was about forty-five years old. For twenty-five years he was a letter carrier at Catskill. He is survived by his mother, Mrs. John Lydecker, and a sister. Mrs. Eugene L. Leigh of Coxsackie. He was a member of the Catskill Odd Fellows and Ilks, and of Hose Company No. 1. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Tuesday, March 31, 1925. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Margaret MANNING

Mrs. Margaret Manning, widow of Isaac M. Manning, died at Palenville on Friday. She formerly resided at Saxton. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Saturday March 20, 1926. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Frank R. MARTIN

Frank R. Martin of Willow, died at Hunter, March 18, at the age of 73 years, having survived his wife only a few weeks. He is survived by two brothers and two sisters, J.H. Martin of Willow, N.Y., W.E. Martin, Mary E. and Emma D. Martin of Hunter, whith whom he resided since the death of his wife; three nieces, the Misses Ella and Nellie Martin of Willow, and Mrs. Archie Smith of Roosevelt, L.I. Funeral Services at his late home Wednesday, March 21. Internment in Palewood Cemetery. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Thursday March 22, 1923. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Adam A. PELHAM

Adam A. Pelham died at Palenville. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Monday August 13, 1934. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Adam Arthur Pelham died at Palenville, Greene county, Tuesday, aged 53 years. He was a native of the town of Catskill, born at Pelham's Corners. His wife, who before marriage was Helen Pierce, survives him. Interment in the Jefferson Rural Cemetery. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Wednesday August 13, 1924. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

George PRENDERGAST

In Coxsackie, Sunday, June 18th, George, youngest son of Thomas and Kate Prendergast, aged 1 year, 1 month and 23 days. [The Catskill Recorder, Catskill, NY, June 30, 1871, p. 3; transcribed by J. Swanson]

Allen V. REED

Word has been received in Catskill of the death of Rear Admiral Allen V. Reed, U.S.N., retired, in Washington, D.C., on January 14. Admiral Reed died suddenly of heart trouble at his home. He was 79 years old. The deceased was a classmate of Admiral Dewey and retired in 1896 after more than forty years' service. He was a native of Oak Hill and was well known by many of the older residents of Greene county. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Wednesday January 17, 1917. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Lawrence RISSE

Lawrence Risse, two, died in a Catskill hospital from b urns received when his father's automobile left the highway, overturned and burned. The parents were cut and bruised. [Middletown Times Herald, Middletown, N.Y., Monday July 25, 1938, page two. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Mrs. ROE

Mrs. Benjamin Roe of this city died in Catskill. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Monday January 22, 1940. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Nina Howland ROGERS

Shortsville - Mrs. Nina Howland Rogers, 81, a resident of Shortsville for many years, died late Friday (Mar. 2, 1945) in Thompson Memorial Hospital, Canandaigua. Born in Greene County, she married Charles Rogers, also of that area, in 1882. Following their marriage the couple had resided in Ontario County. Besides her husband at home, she leaves a son, Frank Rogers, Shortsville, and a sister, Margaret Howland, Victor. Funeral services will be held in the family home in Main Street, Shortsville, at 2 p. m. tomorrow. The Rev. John T. Wriggins, pastor of Shortsville Presbyterian Church, will officiate. Burial in Brookside Cemetery. [Rochester Democrat and Chronicle (Rochester, NY) 04 Mar 1945, p57]

Charles W. SAXE

Catskill, June 5 - Charles W. Saxe, for many years a resident of Kingston, died Saturday morning at Memorial Hospital in Catskill after a long illness. He was in his 82nd year. Mr. Saxe leaves to mourn his loss one son, Perry W. Saxe, of Stamford, Conn., and two daughters, Mrs. W.H. Moore, of Windham, and Mrs. George S. Silver of Fishkill. Since the death of his wife in 1928, Mr. Saxe had resided with his daughters. Services will be held from the M.E. Church in Windham on Tuesday at 1:30 p.m. Burial will be in Wiltwyck cemetery in Kingston at 3:30 p.m. Mr. Saxe was a member of the First Dutch Reformed Church in Kingston. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Monday June 5, 1939. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Robert Minturn SAYRE

DIED, At Cairo, Greene county, N. Y. on Monday, February 11, Robert Minturn Sayre, aged 20 years and 10 months, son of Capt. Matthew Sayre, formerly of Sailors' Home, New York. [Source: The Weekly Herald, (New York, NY) Saturday, February 23, 1856; transcribed by Susan Geist]

William B. SMITH

Death of William Burr SMITH

Remains Brought to Batavia (IL) for Interment ,Sat. Dec. 1st.

We glean the following obituary from the Chicago Inter Ocean, which will be of interest to our many readers, as deceased was well known and highly respected by a large number of our citizens, who tender their sympathy to the bereaved wife, who was a former resident of this city. The remains were brought here for burial beside those of other loved ones:

Wm. Burr SMITH, died at his home, No. 2909 Wabash Ave., Nov. 28, 1894. He was born in Green Co., N. Y., Feb. 3, 1835; son of Nathan, the only one of five brothers – H enry, Elijah, Orson, and Hiram – who did not come to Chicago from Mich., where his f ather had settled, July 20, 1851, and for a time resided with his uncle, Orson at No. 181 Wabash Ave. He was a valued member of the Markley Alling & Co., from 1864 until his death.

He was married July 12, 1861, to Irene A., daughter of Rev. M. N. LORD, who survives him; their three children being dead.

Mr. SMITH was one of the substantial members of the National Guard Cadets organized in McCarthy's Building, on northeast corner Washington and Dearborn Sts., March 19, 1856, of which he was first lieutenant. Its first captain, the late Colonel Joseph R. SCOTT, of the Nineteenth Illinois Volunteers, and he, were roommates for years. He continued with the Cadets of the Sixtieth Regiment, and later, as one of the most efficient members of the United States Zouave Cadets, commanded by the late Colonel ELLSWORTH, that made a tour of the Eastern cities in July and August, 1860. Among the members he was the most popular, always a great favorite, and was usually endearingly addressed by the sobriquet as “Powhattan,” or “Pow,” for short. His strict integri ty and social qualities made him popular among his business associates, and to his friends whom he considered less successful in life he was liberal to a fault. [Batavia Herald, Kane County, IL, 6 Dec. 1894. Submitted by KT]

Dorcas (Doris)SNODGRASS

Catskill, NY - Autopsy held on body of Doris Snodgrass, Mt. Vernon girl, whose body was found in Catskill creek. Dr. Rooney, who presided, gave verdict of drowning. [The Day Book., July 30, 1912]

-- Catskill, NY - Dist. Atty Wilbur and Coroner van Denburg may ask family for viscera of Dorcas Snodgrass, whose body was found in creek. Examination showed death was by drowning, but position of body in shallow water has given rise to gheory that she may have been drugged and thrown in water. [The Day Book., July 31, 1912] -- Catskill, NY - 3 ounce cap, labeled "ether" but which had contained some other fluid, discovered near spot where Dorcas Snodgrass' body was found. [The day book. (Chicago, Ill.), 01 Aug. 1912] -- Catskill, NY - Mrs. John L. Crider, sister of Dorcas Snodgrass, whose body was found in creek, said she was satisfied there was nothing mysterious about case and police investigation has been called off. [The day book. (Chicago, Ill.), 02 Aug. 1912]

Herbert W. TERWILLIGER

Herbert W. Terwilliger, a former resident, died in Catskill. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Friday, June 11, 1937. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Clare R. THURSTON

Mrs. John A. Thurston died at New Baltimore early Easter morning, where she and Dr. Thurston have been living since his retirement as pastor emeritus from the Bellevue Reformed Church in Schenectady last year. Mrs. Thurston was Clare R. Ellis, a teacher in Rahway, N. J., more than 40 years ago, when she married the Rev. John A. Thurston to settle in New Hurley for nine years, and later to serve the Reformed Church in Chicago, Rochester and Schenectady. The funeral will be in Schenectady Wednesday evening, with burial to follow at Somerville, N. J. Highland. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Monday April 13, 1936. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Mrs. TICO

Mrs. William Tico, Sr., died in Catskill. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Monday, November 3, 1924. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Namoni L. TOWNSAND

Mrs. Namoni L. Townsand died at Lexington, Greene county, on Wednesday evening, aged 69 years. The funeral will be held on Sunday from the Big Indian M.E. Church with interment at Pine Hill. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Thursday, September 28, 1916 Kingston, New York. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

John W. VAN LEUVEN

John W. Van Leuven, a Civil War veteran, died at Catskill, aged 82. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Monday August 13, 1934. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

James F. WALSH

James Francis Walsh, aged 15 years, died in Catskill Tuesday following several weeks' illness with typhoid fever. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Wednesday January 17, 1917. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

John L. WHITBECK

At Leeds, Thursday, June 22nd, John L. Whitbeck, D. G. W. P., Leeds Division, No. 319 S. of T. [The Catskill Recorder, Catskill, NY, June 30, 1871, p. 3; transcribed by J. Swanson]

John H. WOLVEN

John Henry Wolven died in Palenville, Tuesday afternoon, February 14, at the home of James Whitney, in his 76th year. He is survived by a sister, Mrs. Fred Snyder of Centerville, and three brothers, Jacob, Levi and Lawrence Wolven. Funeral was held in Blue Mountain church this afternoon, at 2 o'clock. Internment in Blue Mountain cemetery. [Kingston Daily Freeman - Thursday February 16, 1922. Submitted by Melissa Rodriguez.]

Helen E. WRIGHT

Died at the residence of her daughter Mrs. Helen E. Wright, in Watseka, on Saturday, June 9th, 1883, Mrs. Mary A. Alfred, in the 60th year of her age. Mrs. Alfred was born in Windham, N.Y., where she lived until she grew to womanhood. She was married in New York City to Samuel Hoyt of Connecticut, with whom she removed to Boston, where he died. After a few years she came west with her deceased husband’s family, and located in Henry, Marshall County, Ill., where she afterward married David Alfred. A few years ago Mr. and Mrs. Alfred removed to Chatsw orth, where they resided until recently. About two years ago she was seized with a cancer and has been a severe but patient sufferer ever since. Yet through all her afflictions she never lost her reason, and her mind was unimpaired until the last moment of her life, and while dying spoke of it as placidly as if she were going on a pleasant journey. Death had no terror for her and she passed away in the peaceful and happy hope of a brighter life beyond this world of sorrow and suffering. For 20 years she was a faithful adherent of the New Church (Swedenborgian) and a consistent and devout receiver of its doctrines. Her disposition was quiet and gentle, humble in her tastes and habits, display and worldly vanity were repugnant to her. She was a great lover of books and flowers and her happiest moments (if we accept her love for children) were spent in their company. She leaves in our midst a husband and only daughter to mourn her loss. The f uneral services were held at the house, Rev. Homer McVey of Chatsworth officiating. The remains were interred at Oak Ridge cemetery on the same lot where repose the remains of her son-in-law, the late Judge M. B. Wright. [The Henry Republican, Henry Illinois, June 21, 1883; sub by NP]