INTRODUCTION

Gombe State is one of the six states that form Nigeria's North-East geopolitical zone. It shares interstate boundaries with Yobe to the North, Bauchi to the West, Taraba to the South and Borno and Adamawa to the East. The state capital is Gombe.

LANDMASS, LOCATION, AND POPULATION

Gombe State covers an area of 18,767 square kilometres. It lies at latitude 10°15’ North and longitude 11°10’ East. It has a population of 2,365,040 (2006 census) 3,256,962 (2016 forecast) and a population density of 126. The state accounts for 1.9 % of Nigeria's total population.

HISTORY AND PEOPLE

Founded in 1804 by Buba Yero, also known as Abubakar, Gombe was a composite of the emirate in Gombe North and the ethnic groups that resided in Gombe South. In 1824 the emirate headquarters was established at Gambe before being renamed Gombe Aba in 1841. The emirate enjoyed years of success and prosperity until wars and the encroachment of British rule precipitated its collapse in the early 20th Century.

During this time the capital was moved to Doma which was then renamed Gombe. Gombe State was carved out of the old Bauchi State in October 1996 by the military government of General Sani Abacha.

Though Hausa is the common language, there are 20 other languages in the state. This diversity is also represented in the number of ethnic groups in the state. The Hausa, Tangale, Terawa, Waja, Kumo, Fulani, Kanuri, Bolewa, Jukun, Pero/Shonge, Tula, Cham, Lunguda, Dadiya, Banbuka and others all have roots in Gombe.

MAIN TOWNS AND CITIES

Gombe (capital), Kumo, Bajoga, Dukku, Pindinga, and Deba Habe.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT AREAS

ADMINISTRATORS AND GOVERNORS

Group Captain Joseph Orji (Administrator - Military): Oct 1996 - Aug 1998

Mohammed Bawa (Administrator - Military): Aug 1998 - May 1999

Abubakar Habu Hashidu (Governor – Civilian (All People’s Party): May 1999 May 2003

Mohammed Danjuma Goje (Governor - Civilian (People’s Democratic Party): May 2003 - May 2011

Ibrahim Hassan Dankwambo (Governor - Civilian (People’s Democratic Party): May 2011- May 2019.

Inuwa Yahaya (Governor – Civilian (All Progressives Congress): May 2019 - Present

ECONOMY AND EDUCATION

Agriculture is the main occupation in the state. Since the opening of the railways in 1963, the city of Gombe has been a major collecting point for groundnut and cotton. It is also a local trade centre in sorghum, millet, cowpeas, cassava (manioc), beans, onion and tobacco, as well as for rearing cattle, goat, sheep, horse, and donkey.

Traditional crafts like weaving and the dyeing of cotton are still practiced. The presence of limestone deposits led to the building of a cement factory at nearby Ashaka in the early 1970s. The period also saw the commencement of modern textile manufacturing. A seed-oil mill has been built and vegetable oil is processed in the state.

The tertiary institutions in the state are Federal University, Kashere; Gombe State University; Federal College of Education, Gombe; School of Health Technology, Kaltungo and Federal College of Horticulture, Dadin Kowa.

FAMOUS SITES AND CULTURE

Sites

Tomb of Buba Yero, Gombe

Abubakar dan Usman Subande also known as Buba Yero was the founder and first Emir of Gombe.

The tomb which is located in Gombe has been designated a national monument.

Bima Hill, Gombe

Located in Gombe, Bima hill has a flattop with a pond in its centre. The hill is said to be sacred and it is believed that a messiah once emerged from it.

The underlying rock is sedimentary in nature (aquifer) because of its capacity to yield water.

Tangale Hill, Tangale

Tangale is a volcanic hill located in Billiri local government area.

It has the highest peak in the state and is a favourite with hikers.

Culture

Kamo is a festival of unity celebrated every April by the Kamo and Awak ethnic groups in Kaltungo LGA.

It is marked with cultural displays and wrestling to promote integration among the communities in the area.

The Dog festival is a significant cultural event among the people of Tangale.

Other cultural events in the state include the Kaltungo, Chugothe, Kuram, Yeku, Bashari, Yiliri, and Ilar-Zhare festivals.

NOTABLE INDIGENES

Shehu Usman Abubakar (1938 – 2014)

Abubakar Habu Hashidu (1944 – 2018)

DID YOU KNOW