Gombe State in north-east Nigeria has become a major economic and trading centre, with strong agriculture and mining sectors. With the government announcing new projects to further tap the state’s economic potential, Gombe State is expected to continue to grow and become a major force in the north of the country.

History & Culture

Gombe State – the name of which comes from its capital, Gombe – came into existence in October 1996 during an administrative restructuring of the country. The state has three political districts for legislative representation at the national level – Gombe South, Gombe Central and Gombe North – and is further divided into the local government areas (LGAs) of Akko, Balanga, Billiri, Dukku, Funakaye, Gombe, Kaltungo, Kwami, Nafada, Shongom and Yamaltu/Deba.

There is a strong tradition of craftwork in Gombe State, with notable handicrafts including leather, cloth-weaving and calabash decoration. Musical entertainment, cultural dances and festivals are also common. The most widely practiced religions are Islam and Christianity, although there are also traditionalists adhering to indigenous faiths in rural areas of the state.

Geography, Climate & Environment

Gombe State borders Adamawa, Bauchi, Borno, Taraba and Yobe states, offering a gateway to northern Nigeria for trade and transport. Its terrain is mountainous and undulating to the north, with flat plains in the south. It is home to the Gongola River, which joins the Benue River at the town of Numan in Adamawa State. The river and seasonal streams make guinea savannah grassland the primary form of vegetation, while woodlands cover the south-east and south-west.

There are two main seasons in Gombe State: the dry season from November to March, and the rainy season from April to October, with an average rainfall of 850 mm. The average high temperature can rise above 30°C during the warmest months of the year.

Around 80% of the population of Gombe State works in the agriculture sector. The main crops include millet, yams, maize, tomatoes, cotton and groundnuts. Rainwater and irrigation systems provide water for crops, as well as support livestock farming and fisheries. Gombe State is also home to various mineral resources, such as limestone, gypsum, quartz, silica sand and potash.

Demography

According to the Gombe State Development Plan 2021-30 unveiled in February 2021, the population has grown significantly in recent years, from 2.3m in 2006 to almost 3.6m as of 2019. It is expected to reach nearly 6m by 2030. Gombe State’s population is young, with around 62% under the age of 34 and 46% under the age of 15. As of 2019 the state’s population was 52.6% male and 47.4% female.

Politics

Muhammad Inuwa Yahaya of the All Progressives Congress political party was re-elected governor in March 2023. Gombe State’s government has executive, legislative and judiciary branches. As of March 2023 the state website listed 23 members in the Executive Council, 21 of which were commissioners. The Gombe State House of Assembly has 24 members.

The state government delegates responsibilities at the local level to elected council officials, with councillors and chairpersons of local bodies responsible for day-to-day administrative activities. The Gombe State House of Assembly enacts laws on the establishment, structure, composition, financing and functions of local government councils. In addition to the 11 LGAs, Gombe State has 17 emirates and chiefdoms.

Socio-Economics

Farming is Gombe State’s primary economic activity, followed by trading and mining, which employ the remaining 20% of the working population. Most of the companies that operate in the state tend to be micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises. Ashaka Cement, one of Nigeria’s largest such factories and a subsidiary of Lafarge Africa, is a significant employer in local communities. Nevertheless, the reported unemployment rate in Gombe State was 27% in 2019, a figure that the government hopes to halve to 14% by 2030 as part of its development plan.