Adding the 32nd firm to its collection of companies acquired in the past three years, Oracle Corp. announced Tuesday that it bought Lodestar Corp., a Massachusetts company that makes software used by electric, gas and water utilities.

Oracle did not disclose the purchase price for Lodestar, which is privately held. Lodestar’s 125 employees will join Redwood Shores-based Oracle in its relatively new Utilities Global Business Unit.

Lodestar sells meter-reading and meter-data management software.

Three years ago, Oracle began acquiring companies that make software applications for specific industries and business processes as part of its strategy to grow beyond the database software business.

Oracle’s acquisition binge got rolling with its January 2005 purchase of the former PeopleSoft Inc. of Pleasanton and has not let up. Just last week, Oracle completed its purchase of the former Hyperion Solutions Corp.

In all, Oracle has spent more than $20 billion to acquire 32 companies, including former Siebel Systems Inc. of San Mateo and Sleepycat Software of Emeryville.

Larry Ellison, Oracle’s chief executive, has frequently said he aims to make Oracle the world’s largest business software company, overtaking SAP AG of Germany, the current leader.

During a conference call last month announcing Oracle’s third-quarter earnings, Ellison said he believes his strategy is working because Oracle’s software applications business grew 57 percent in the quarter, whereas SAP’s grew 10 percent.

Oracle’s erstwhile main business, enterprise database software, has matured, with that industry typically growing less than 10 percent in most years.

Oracle entered the utilities application space by acquiring SPL WorldGroup in November and renaming it to create Oracle Utilities Global Business Unit.

“With the addition of Lodestar’s products, Oracle plans to deliver the most comprehensive suite of mission-critical operational systems for all segments of the utilities industry,” Oracle Senior Vice President Larry Hagewood said in a statement.

Shares of Oracle slipped 12 cents to $18.82 a share in Nasdaq trading Tuesday.