Amitabh Bachchan on how he got married to Jaya Bachchan

by Raghuvendra Singh | June 3, 2019, 6:13 PM IST

Amitabh Bachchan got married to Jaya Bachchan, on June 3 in 1973. Today this golden couple celebrates their 46th wedding anniversary. Big B accepted advanced wishes and informed fans that Jaya Bachchan is out of the country, so the celebration might take place once she's back in town. The superstar shared some insights of his marriage on his blog.

He wrote, "I thank you all for the wishes that have poured in in advance, Jaya is not in the country, but I'll make sure your wishes reach her too."

He further added, “I lived on the 7th Road of this society.. on a rented house .. marriage had been decided among us .. nothing to be exaggerated or celebrated with any aplomb .. just the two families and .. done .. off to London, my first trip ever and hers too .. Zanjeer a success and a promise that if it did well we would all - a gang of our friends - would go on a holiday to London!”

Big B was very close to his parents and he wrote that when he shared the news about the London trip with his father, Harivanshrai Bachchan, he asked them to get marry first and then together on a trip. “Seeking or rather informing parents that we were a group of friends going to England.. who all are going came the query from Babuji .. names disclosed .. Jaya is also going with you.. you both are alone .. yes.. if you have to go marry and go.. ok .. pandit and family informed.. next day all set .. flight at night .. marriage to finish before the flight.. I dress up in formal marriage Indian .. get into my car and want to drive to Malabar Hill where her friends lived and where the ceremony was to be done.. my driver Nagesh, pushes me out and insist he would drive me to the wedding .. the substitute for the tradition horse..”

This wedding was attended by their families, close friends and neighbors as Mr Bachchan wrote, “Waiting all set at Mangal, the name of the house on rent on the 7th road JVPD Scheme.. and it begins to drizzle.. neighbours rush out to me .. leave for the wedding now.. the rain is a good omen.. off I went.. wedding over in a few hours .. done .. Mr and Mrs proclaimed .. over !!”