Jaya Bachchan married Amitabh Bachchan on June 3, 1973, less than a month after the release of their film Zanjeer which turned out to be a breakthrough for Big B.

The two were in a relationship for years before marrying in 1973 and in a recent podcast What The Hell Navya hosted by their granddaughter Navya Naveli Nanda, Jaya was asked about how Amitabh proposed her for marriage.

She revealed that he had only one condition for marrying her & that was he didn’t want her working 9-5.

She said, “I was shooting in Calcutta and we had decided that we will go for a holiday if one movie that we had done is a hit. Zanjeer. The movie was a hit. I was shooting for a movie in Calcutta and nana (grandpa) called and said, 'There's a problem'. We had decided we will get married in October because by then my work would have reduced. He said, 'I definitely don't want a wife who will be 9-5. Please work, you must work but not every day. You choose your projects, work with the right people'.”

She added, “I said okay. He then called me and said, 'My parents are saying you can't go for a holiday with Jaya, if you want to for a holiday with her, you marry her'. He said, 'What do you think?' I said, 'Well we were planning to get married in October so it's okay we will do it in June. Khatam (The end).”

The actress further recalled, “I said, 'But you will have to speak to my parents'. He called my father and spoke to him. My father wasn't very happy, my father never wanted me to get married. We were three sisters. He said, ‘I have not brought you into this world to just educate yourself, get married and settle down and have children. I want you all to do something in life’. That was my father. And then he spoke to my father who said, 'That's fine. We don't want a big wedding. My parents are alive, I want them to attend'.”

After marrying Amitabh Bachchan, Jaya cut down on her work & post the release of Sholay in 1975, she was only seen in the lead roles in 1979 film Nauker & 1981 film Silsila.

17 years later, she started her second innings with critically acclaimed Hazaar Chaurasi Ki Maa (1998). And went on to feature in films like Fiza (2000), Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham (2001) & Kal Ho Naa Ho (2003) among others.