Bollywood superstar Amitabh Bachchan married Jaya Bachchan on June 3, 1973. But before marrying her, the 'Sholay' actor had a condition. He didn't want his wife to work regular hours after marriage. Also, Amitabh and Jaya, who were to marry in October 1973, had to reschedule their wedding as they didn't get permission from Amitabh's father, Harivansh Rai Bachchan to go on a holiday together before marriage.

advertisement

During one of the episodes of her granddaughter Navya Nanda's podcast, What The Hell Navya, Jaya recalled what Amitabh told her about working after marriage. 'We had decided we will marry in October because by then my work would have been reduced. But he had told me, ‘I definitely don’t want a wife who will be 9 to 5. Please work, but not every day. You choose your projects and work with the right people,’’ Jaya shared.

Amitabh and Jaya's wedding was an intimate affair. It took place at Jaya’s Godmother’s house in Mumbai. This year, the couple celebrated their 51st wedding anniversary.

After marriage, while Big B continued to act in films and became one of the biggest superstars of Hindi cinema, Jaya spent more time with her family. She took care of her children, Abhishek and Shweta Bachchan.

Speaking about the same, Big B said at the India Today Conclave in 2014, “One thing I find very admirable about Jaya is that she chose to give preference to home and not films. There was no obstacle from me ever, it was her decision. In marriages, all decisions are taken by the wife.”

Jaya Bachchan also shared on Navya's podcast how they got married in June instead of October to go on a vacation together.

She said, "We had to go on a trip after the success of the film we did together (Zanjeer). But one day, he called me and said, ‘There’s a problem. My parents won’t allow us to go on a holiday and if we want to go, we must get married.’ So, I said we were already planning to get married in October, let’s get it done in June. But you will have to speak to my parents. He called my father, who was not very happy, since he never wanted me to get married."

Work-wise, Jaya Bachchan recently returned to films with Karan Johar's Rocky Aur Rani Kii Prem Kahaani.