After 51 years of marriage, Bollywood's esteemed actress and politician Jaya Bachchan has disclosed the condition Amitabh Bachchan set at the time of their wedding.

According to Indian media, Jaya Bachchan recently participated in her granddaughter Navya's podcast "What the hell Navya?" where she reminisced about her marriage to Amitabh Bachchan.

Jaya Bachchan said that when she and Amitabh Bachchan decided to get married, he told me that he did not want a wife who worked outside the home for 5 to 9 hours a day. Instead, he wanted a wife who would spend as much time as possible at home and with the family.

The senior actress said that Amitabh Bachchan set the condition that if they were to get married, she would not go to work daily and work routine hours. "I could work, but not every day", she stated.

Read 17 cars, explosive net worth: Breaking down Jaya, Amitabh Bachchan's staggering wealth

She said that we had decided to get married in October, and before the wedding, we were supposed to go on vacation together to celebrate the success of our film 'Zanjeer.' However, Amitabh Bachchan's parents did not allow this.

Jaya Bachchan said that Amitabh Bachchan came to her and said there was a problem as their parents would not allow them to travel together before they were married, hence they decided to get married in June instead of October. In this way, they could spend the holidays together.

She said that Amitabh Bachchan spoke to my father about early marriage, but he was not happy with it because my father was not in favour of our marriage.

It is noteworthy that in an interview with Indian media in 2014, Amitabh Bachchan had said that he liked one thing about Jaya very much: she prioritized the home over films after marriage.

Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan got married in June 1973. The couple has a son, Abhishek Bachchan, and a daughter, Shweta Bachchan.

After their marriage, Amitabh Bachchan or Big B continued to act in films and became one of the biggest superstars of Bollywood whereas Jaya spent more time with her children Abhishek and Shweta Bachchan in order to take care of her family.