Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan have been enjoying their marital bliss for five decades now. The star couple got married in an intimate wedding ceremony on 3rd June 1973 in Mumbai. In the autobiography ‘In the Afternoon of Time’ Amitabh Bachchan’s father Harivansh Rai Bachchan shared that he got an unexpected response from Jaya Bachchan’s father Taroon Kumar Bhaduri after the wedding. Bhaduri said ‘My family is utterly ruined’. The renowned poet also shared that the wedding took place at a friend’s place as they wanted to keep it private. He also stated that former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was invited to the wedding ceremony as Amitabh’s mother Teji Bachchan was a close friend of hers.

In the Afternoon of Time, Harivansh Rai wrote “Before we left, I embraced the father of my new daughter-in-law and congratulated him on getting a son-in-law like Amit, expecting him to say the same in respect of Jaya. But he said, ‘My family is utterly ruined’.”

He also shared that as Amitabh was getting stardom after his hit movies like Zanjeer, Namak Haram, and Saudagar, so they decided wedding to intimate to avoid fans invasion.

“Jaya’s family decided not to hold the ceremony at their flat in Beach House but at a friend’s place on the top floor of the Skylark building in Malabar Hills. Jaya’s parents wanted the marriage to be conducted in the Bengali manner, to which we had no objection. The first stage was the var-puja, the veneration of the groom, which involved Jaya’s father coming to Mangal (Amitabh’s residence) with gifts and conducting a small ceremony; I then reciprocated by doing the same for the bride at Beach House. I noticed something quite unexpected at Beach House: nobody in the family, apart from Jaya, showed even the slightest trace of pleasure,” he added.

“We went up in the lift, Jaya was in her bridal adornment, and for the first time, I saw a bashful shyness on her face and realised what a particular aspect of beauty it is,” Harivansh Rai recalled in his autobiography.

This year, Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan celebrated their 51st wedding anniversary. They are parents of two children Abhishek Bachchan and Shweta Bachchan. They are also grandparents of Navya Naveli Nanda, Agastya Nanda and Aaradhya Bachchan.

Also read: Farida Jalal Shares Amitabh Bachchan And Jaya Bachchan Fought A Lot During Their Dating Days; Says ‘Jaya Roti Thi…’

Also read: Navya Naveli Nanda Wishes Grandparents Amitabh Bachchan And Jaya Bachchan On Their 51st Anniversary With Throwback Photo