Amitabh Bachchan had put a condition to marry Jaya, he had said- 'I don't want a wife who...'

Very few people know that actor amitabh bachchan had put a condition to marry Jaya Bachchan. Let us tell you about this.

Jaya Bachchan and amitabh bachchan are Bollywood's favorite couples. The veteran actress has always stood by her husband Amitabh in difficult times. When the discussion of amitabh bachchan and Rekha's relationship was making headlines in the media, Jaya stood by him and proved that all this was just a rumor. However, very few people know that amitabh bachchan had put a condition to marry Jaya Bachchan.

Amitabh Bachchan did not want a wife who worked from 9 to 5

Amitabh and Jaya got secretly married in a friend's apartment in 1973 after dating for some time. However, before marriage, amitabh had put a condition that Jaya would reduce her working hours. Yes, in a conversation with her granddaughter Navya Naveli Nanda in the podcast 'What the Hell Navya', Jaya revealed Amitabh's condition.

Jaya had revealed that they had decided to get married in october as she would have less work during that time. However, amitabh had directly told her that he did not want a wife who works from 9 to 5. He clarified that she can work, but she should reduce her working hours.

Sharing the anecdote, jaya bachchan said, "We had decided that we would get married in october because my workload will reduce by then, but he told me, 'I don't want a wife who works from 9 to 5. Please work, but not every day. Choose your projects and work with the right people."

Jaya Bachchan's father was not happy with her decision to marry Amitabh Bachchan

In the same podcast, jaya bachchan said that she was planning to go on a tour with amitabh bachchan when one day he called her and said that if they got married, his parents would allow them to go on a vacation. She agreed and he asked her to talk to his parents.

Jaya Bachchan revealed that her father was not happy with the news of her marriage. She said, "So I said we were already planning to get married in october, let's do it in June, but you have to talk to my parents. He called my father, who was not very happy because he never wanted me to get married."

When amitabh bachchan praised jaya bachchan for choosing home over films after marriage

Amitabh Bachchan is called the 'Superstar of the Century', while his wife jaya bachchan used to stay at home and take care of their children abhishek bachchan and Shweta Bachchan. Once, in 2014, at the 'India Today Conclave', Amitabh Bachchan praised jaya bachchan for staying at home and not giving priority to films.

He said, "One thing I find very admirable about Jaya is that she gave priority to home over films. There was never any interference from my side, it was her decision. In a marriage, all decisions are taken by the wife."