About this Item

FRÉDÉRIC MISTRAL (1830-1914). Mistral was a French writer who often used the Occitan language. He was awarded the 1904 Nobel Prize in Literature. ALS. 3pg. 5" x 8". June 21, 1901. Maiano. An autograph letter signed "F. Mistral" in the Occitan language. A note at the top indicates this was written to a daughter of Felix Gras just months after Gras died; Felix Gras (1844-1901) was a poet and novelist from Provence. There are a couple of pencil notes, and the letter is in fine condition with a dark autograph. Seller Inventory # 4123

Contact seller

Report this item

Stuart Lutz Historic Documents, Inc. buys and sells historic letters, documents, manuscripts and archives. My specialties include Presidents, Revolutionary War and Civil War figures, Declaration of Independence Signers, famous authors, important business leaders, notable scientists, aviators, notable women and African-Americans, and other "household famous names." I also enjoy handling the letters and archives of ordinary people whose writings have extraordinary or unusual content, such as an eyewitness description of the Pearl Harbor attack. I am a member of all major trade organizations, including the Antiquarian Booksellers Association of America (ABAA), the Professional Autograph Dealers Association (PADA), the Appraisers Association of America, the Manuscript Society and the Ephemera Society. I am located in South Orange, New Jersey, and I travel to many book and manuscript shows every year. I am one of the very few members of the Appraisers Association of America certified to appraise historic documents, manuscripts and letters. I am USPAP qualified to perform appraisals for estate, donation and insurance purposes; please contact me for a confidential discussion of your appraisal needs. I am an author myself, having published The Last Leaf: Voices of History's Last-Known Survivors (Prometheus Books, 2010) that contains 39 interviews with the last survivor of, or final eyewitness to, important historical events. Chapters include interviews with the last three Civil War widows, the final living pitcher to surrender a home run to Babe Ruth, Houdini's last stagehand, and the final American doughboy. Lastly, I can frequently be seen authenticating and appraising on the History Channel hit show Pawn Stars.

Visit Seller's Storefront

Association Member Members of these associations are committed to maintaining the highest standards. They vouch for the authenticity of all items offered for sale. They provide expert and detailed descriptions, disclose all significant defects and/or restorations, provide clear and accurate pricing, and operate with fairness and honesty during the purchase experience.

Seller's business information

Stuart Lutz Historic Documents, Inc

784 Morris Turnpike, PMB #161, Short Hills, NJ, 07078, U.S.A.

Terms of Sale:

All sales are final fourteen days after receipt of the materials. All materials that I sell are guaranteed genuine forever by me. If an item is proven not to be genuine (accompanied by a written letter by a known autograph or document expert), I will refund the full purchase price to the original buyer, and this guarantee is without a time limit.

Shipping Terms:

Your item will be waterproofed with plastic wrap and sealed in a stiff cardboard container. Please contact me about shipping rates, since it is based on weight and size.

Detailed Seller Information