The Department of Defense today announced an Army Research Laboratory-led project team investigating quantum constructs to revolutionize precision weapons as the winner of the 2024 Applied Research for Advancement of Science and Technology Priorities, or ARAP, program award competition.

To participate in the annual competition, the Department's Science and Technology Communities of Interest and research laboratories submit proposals for research projects in high-priority technology areas.

The Science and Technology Executive Committee, which includes representatives from each of the Services and the Defense Agencies, evaluates the proposals against specific criteria. The winners were chosen based on specific measures including eligibility for applied research funding, ability to address a specific technology or capability gap, capacity to enhance collaboration across DOD, presentation of a realistic program management plan, and demonstration of a clear pathway from research to product fielding.

In total, the committee received nine submissions for this year's award competition and selected three teams as finalists. Each finalist team briefed the committee on its proposal.

"After careful review and evaluation by the (committee), I am delighted to announce we have selected the CLassical quantum hybrid constructs to Advance Weapons Systems project team for the Fiscal Year 2024 ARAP Award," said Science and Technology Chair Dr. Steven Wax.

"We look forward to following the progress and accomplishments of the CLAWS effort leading into successful technology transition," continued Wax, who is also acting deputy chief technology officer for science and technology in the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering.

The Army Research Laboratory, under the U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command, collaborated with the Naval Research Laboratory and the Air Force Research Laboratory to submit the winning CLAWS proposal. The project team will advance quantum technology applications to kinetic weapons systems, enabling greater precision at longer range, lower collateral damage, and more agile platforms.

The winning team, comprised of representatives from multiple military Services, will partner with academia and industry in a multidisciplinary effort to develop emerging technologies into disruptive capabilities in areas including imaging, positioning, navigation, and timing, and quantum.

The three-year, $45-million project will support scientists and engineers across DOD and at least 20 new graduate and post-doctoral students who participate through the Department's science and technology research laboratories' academic partners.

About USD(R&E)