Saginaw, MI – September 15, 2004

Saginaw County Event Center facility manager SMG announced today it has awarded the naming rights for the Saginaw County Event Center to The Dow Chemical Company. Dow has changed the name to The Dow Event Center.

For almost three years, at the direction of Saginaw County, SMG in cooperation with Saginaw Spirit Hockey Club, LLC, has sought to strengthen the financial position of the Event Center with a naming rights sponsor. The Saginaw County Building Authority and the County Board of Commissioners today voted to award the sponsorship to Dow. The cost of the sponsorship is $250,000 per year, for 10 years.

“Saginaw County leaders feel this naming sponsorship will have many positive benefits for the area,” according to Marc McGill, Saginaw County Controller. “We are confident the new name will encourage growth in the area and entice additional businesses to move to downtown Saginaw. The County, SMG and the Spirit agreed from the start that a naming rights sponsor would be a big boost for the financial stability of the Center.”

The County, SMG and the Spirit looked for a naming sponsor that was local, and a Fortune 500 Company that makes products in America that improve the quality of life for area residents. Dow fit all of the requirements.

Andrew Liveris, Dow president and COO, said the sponsorship enhances a long tradition of company support for mid-Michigan. “Going into our third year as a sponsor of the Saginaw Spirit and with about 30 percent of our employees and retirees residing in the Saginaw/Bay area, we wanted to reinforce our commitment by investing in a facility that is very important to our community.”

With the internationally-known Dow name associated with the Event Center, facility manager SMG expects exceptional benefits. “An association of this nature further legitimizes the facility as a regional sports and entertainment destination and The Dow Event Center will now join the ranks of other complexes such as Comerica Park, Ford Field, Pepsi Arena, and many others that attract world class entertainment,” said Allan Vella, SMG general manager.

“We are excited about the commitment Dow is showing by supporting the community and the Event Center,” said Dick Garber, Ontario Hockey League Governor and owner of the Saginaw Spirit Hockey Club. “Having a naming rights sponsor will help ensure not only local OHL hockey but quality entertainment for the foreseeable future. This is a very positive contribution of quality of life for all residents in Mid-Michigan.”

The new naming rights sponsorship adds to a succession of positive enhancements to the former Civic Center. The rejuvenation for the Event Center began in 2001 when the community supported a millage for renovations. Soon after, the County hired SMG as the facility manager and since then, the Saginaw Spirit hockey club became a major tenant. A two-phase renovation project that began in 2001 was recently completed.

ASM Global was formed in October 2019 from the merger of AEG Facilities , the global innovator in live entertainment venues, and SMG, the gold standard in event management. ASM Global is a venue management powerhouse that spans 5 continents, 14 countries and more than 300 of the world’s most prestigious arenas, stadiums, convention and exhibit centers, and performing arts venues. As the world’s most trusted venue manager, ASM Global provides venue strategy and management, sales, marketing, event booking and programming, construction and design consulting, and pre-opening services. Among the venues in our portfolio are landmark facilities such as McCormick Place & Soldier Field in Chicago, the Los Angeles Convention Center, Tele2 Arena in Stockholm, the Mercedez-Benz Superdome in New Orleans and the Shenzhen World Exhibition and Conference Centre in Shenzhen, China. ASM Global also offers food and beverage options through its concessions and catering companies.