UPCOMING SHOWS

VENUE DETAILS

PRIVATE EVENTS

PROMOTIONS

UPGRADES

Our Venues

About Us

FAQ

Opportunities

Contact Us

Arena

The Red Room

Garden Room

Theater

Jolt Credit Union Event Park

The Arena At The Dow Event Center

The Arena At The Dow Event Center is located at the west end of The Dow Event Center and can host up to 7,600 people. The 25,000 square foot arena which features new LED lighting, a new public address system and a state-of-the-art videoboard, can be modified to host basketball games, hockey, indoor football, concerts, monster truck shows, professional bull riding exhibitions, circuses, trade shows and more.

The Arena At The Dow Event Center is the proud home to the Saginaw Spirit Hockey Team (Mid-Michigan’s OHL Franchise), hosting thousands of fans all season long for 34 action packed home games. In addition, The Arena At The Dow Event Center has also hosted exciting events such as the Shrine Circus, Bob Seger, Brad Paisley, Kid Rock, Carrie Underwood, Disney On Ice, KISS, Thomas Rhett, Sesame Street Live, The Harlem Globetrotters, Monster Jam, Professional Bull Riding and much more!

The Arena At The Dow Event Center is also a great place to host expos, seminars, job fairs and conferences. During hockey season, the ice can be rented out for private use along with locker rooms. Whether you are looking to host skating parties, hockey practice, hockey games or even tournaments, The Arena At The Dow Event Center is your prime location!

The Red Room At The Dow Event Center

The Red Room is a 120’x80’ venue located within the multi-purpose Dow Event Center. The newly renovated space features a permanent bar, stage and premier sound and lighting package to enhance any event. The Red Room is used for a variety of events including concerts, comedy shows, trade shows, wedding receptions, banquets, proms, conferences and ceremonies. Capacity can range from up to 350 guests for banquets and 1200 guests for standing room shows. The Red Room has hosted great events such as Kane Brown, Waka Flocka Flame, Todd Rundgren, Blue October, Taste of Home Cooking School and more!

Meeting Rooms at The Dow Event Center

The Red Room Garden Room Room Dimensions 84'x120' 47'x37' Square Footage 10,000 1,739 Ceiling Height 18' 12' Theater Style Seating 780 150 Classroom Seating 200 50 Banquet Seating 325 80 Capacity 1056 184 8x10 Exhibit Capacity 50 NA 10x10 Exhibit Capacity 30 NA

Contact our Event Department to book your next event by calling (989) 759-1320 or email us!

The Garden Room At The Dow Event Center

The Garden Room is a 47’x37’ venue located within the multi-purpose Dow Event Center. The Garden Room is an excellent location to host smaller banquets, bridal showers, business parties and meetings. By utilizing the Garden Room, guests also have access to an outdoor patio that serves as a great alternative for picnics, ceremonies and additional pre-function space to socialize. Capacity can range from up to 50 guests for banquets and 100 people for theater style seating.

Garden Room Room Dimensions 47'x37' Square Footage 1,739 Ceiling Height 12' Theater Style Seating 150 Classroom Seating 50 Banquet Seating 80 Capacity 184 8x10 Exhibit Capacity NA 10x10 Exhibit Capacity NA Please note: If you have additional tables set up in the room for serving food, gift tables, check-in tables, etc., it will reduce the overall seating listed here.

The Theater At The Dow Event Center

The Theater At The Dow Event Center is located at the east end of The Dow Event Center and can seat up to 2,276 guests. Equipped with professional lighting and sound systems, spacious dressing rooms and convenient loading areas, The Theater At The Dow Event Center is an extraordinary venue for exciting theater entertainment. The Theater At The Dow Event Center has hosted exciting events such as Jerry Seinfeld, Jeff Dunham, Broadway Musicals such as “RENT” & “CATS”, Theresa Caputo, Casting Crowns, Kansas, Newsboys, David Blaine, PJ Masks, Paw Patrol LIVE and more!

The lobby of The Theater At The Dow Event Center can also be transformed to host private events such as dinner parties and wedding receptions for up to 100 people in a banquet set-up. The lobby of The Theater At The Dow Event Center features a large staircase, a king chandelier and a large glass wall to allow plenty of daylight to shine on your event.

*Please note: The Theater does not have an elevator to reach balcony seats. Only stairs are accessible for balcony seating.

Jolt Credit Union Event Park

Jolt Credit Union Event Park is an outdoor venue that includes a 10,000 sq. foot pavilion, a main stage and a grassy area designed to attract a wide range of events and draw people to Downtown Saginaw. The Jolt Credit Union Event Park is a safe and economical place in the community for people of all ages and scopes from around the region to gather for a wide variety of events. The 5500 capacity Jolt Credit Union Event Park is available for concerts, community events, fundraisers and more. The Jolt Credit Union Event Park has hosted major events such as Rob Zombie, Cole Swindell, Chicago, Beach Boys, Kidz Bop Live, The Saginaw Eddy Band Summer Concert Series, Communities First Movies Under The Stars, IMPACT Saginaw Family Fun Day, The Team One Credit Union Rock The Block Ribfest, Tesla, The Team One Credit Union Wine Run, ZZ Top, Midwest Tejano Festival, Old Crow Medicine Show, Bryan Adams, Godsmack and much more.

Naming Rights

Facility History

Press Releases

Box Office and Tickets

Parking & Directions

Naming Rights at the Dow:

Dow Awarded Naming Rights Sponsorship for Saginaw County Event Center

New Name Expected to Attract Growth to Downtown Saginaw

Saginaw, MI – September 15, 2004

Saginaw County Event Center facility manager SMG announced today it has awarded the naming rights for the Saginaw County Event Center to The Dow Chemical Company. Dow has changed the name to The Dow Event Center.

For almost three years, at the direction of Saginaw County, SMG in cooperation with Saginaw Spirit Hockey Club, LLC, has sought to strengthen the financial position of the Event Center with a naming rights sponsor. The Saginaw County Building Authority and the County Board of Commissioners today voted to award the sponsorship to Dow. The cost of the sponsorship is $250,000 per year, for 10 years.

"Saginaw County leaders feel this naming sponsorship will have many positive benefits for the area," according to Marc McGill, Saginaw County Controller. "We are confident the new name will encourage growth in the area and entice additional businesses to move to downtown Saginaw. The County, SMG and the Spirit agreed from the start that a naming rights sponsor would be a big boost for the financial stability of the Center."

The County, SMG and the Spirit looked for a naming sponsor that was local, and a Fortune 500 Company that makes products in America that improve the quality of life for area residents. Dow fit all of the requirements.

Andrew Liveris, Dow president and COO, said the sponsorship enhances a long tradition of company support for mid-Michigan. "Going into our third year as a sponsor of the Saginaw Spirit and with about 30 percent of our employees and retirees residing in the Saginaw/Bay area, we wanted to reinforce our commitment by investing in a facility that is very important to our community."

With the internationally-known Dow name associated with the Event Center, facility manager SMG expects exceptional benefits."An association of this nature further legitimizes the facility as a regional sports and entertainment destination and The Dow Event Center will now join the ranks of other complexes such as Comerica Park, Ford Field, Pepsi Arena, and many others that attract world class entertainment," said Allan Vella, SMG general manager.

"We are excited about the commitment Dow is showing by supporting the community and the Event Center," said Dick Garber, Ontario Hockey League Governor and owner of the Saginaw Spirit Hockey Club. "Having a naming rights sponsor will help ensure not only local OHL hockey but quality entertainment for the foreseeable future. This is a very positive contribution of quality of life for all residents in Mid-Michigan."

The new naming rights sponsorship adds to a succession of positive enhancements to the former Civic Center. The rejuvenation for the Event Center began in 2001 when the community supported a millage for renovations. Soon after, the County hired SMG as the facility manager and since then, the Saginaw Spirit hockey club became a major tenant. A two-phase renovation project that began in 2001 was recently completed.

ASM Global was formed in October 2019 from the merger of AEG Facilities , the global innovator in live entertainment venues, and SMG, the gold standard in event management. ASM Global is a venue management powerhouse that spans 5 continents, 14 countries and more than 300 of the world's most prestigious arenas, stadiums, convention and exhibit centers, and performing arts venues. As the world's most trusted venue manager, ASM Global provides venue strategy and management, sales, marketing, event booking and programming, construction and design consulting, and pre-opening services. Among the venues in our portfolio are landmark facilities such as McCormick Place & Soldier Field in Chicago, the Log Angeles Convention Center, Tele2 Arena in Stockholm, the Mercedez-Benz Superdome in New Orleans and the Shenzhen World Exhibition and Conference Centre in Shenzhen, China. ASM Global also offers food and beverage options through its concessions and catering companies.

The Dow Event Center Facility History

The Saginaw Civic Center was built in 1972 by the City of Saginaw. The Civic Center was composed of three main parts: Wendler Arena, Heritage Theater,and Unity Hall.

Since 1972, the Center has served Saginaw County and the surrounding region as a first-class event venue. The Center has offered all County residents hundreds of entertainment, sport, cultural and educational opportunities annually.

In 2000, Spicer Engineering of Saginaw conducted an Engineering Study of the entire facility and the cost of repairs and maintenance for updating the facility was estimated. Estimates for repairs on the facility came in at $17 million and included repairs and enhancements to lighting, seating, restroom facilities, sound systems, roofing, and loading docks. They were also asked to present the costs associated with building a similar facility somewhere else within the County. It was estimated that it would take $69 million to build such a facility elsewhere. SMG was chosen as the management group to run the newly-dubbed County Event Center.

On June 30, 2001, the City of Saginaw closed the Saginaw Civic Center. The voters of Saginaw County decided on May 8, 2001, to reopen the facility on July 1, 2001, as the Saginaw County Event Center. SMG has managed the facility with the oversight of the Saginaw County Building Authority and an Event Center Advisory Group. The $850,000 subsidy was reduced by almost half in the first three years of operation.

The Garber Management Group purchased an Ontario Hockey League team in early 2002. The team was named the Saginaw Spirit and Wendler Arena became its new home. Over 30 home games are played by the Saginaw Spirit in Wendler Arena every year, adding another dimension to the Event Center.

Dow Chemical Company of Midland was awarded naming rights to the facility in September 2004. The agreement was mutually beneficial; Dow was able to support a worthy community endeavor and the Event Center was given an internationally recognized name to help draw performers and shows. All of these forces should keep The Dow Event Center a vital part of the Saginaw community for years to come.

ASM Global was formed in October 2019 from the merger of AEG Facilities , the global innovator in live entertainment venues, and SMG, the gold standard in event management. ASM Global is a venue management powerhouse that spans 5 continents, 14 countries and more than 300 of the world's most prestigious arenas, stadiums, convention and exhibit centers, and performing arts venues. As the world's most trusted venue manager, ASM Global provides venue strategy and management, sales, marketing, event booking and programming, construction and design consulting, and pre-opening services. Among the venues in our portfolio are landmark facilities such as McCormick Place & Soldier Field in Chicago, the Log Angeles Convention Center, Tele2 Arena in Stockholm, the Mercedez-Benz Superdome in New Orleans and the Shenzhen World Exhibition and Conference Centre in Shenzhen, China. ASM Global also offers food and beverage options through its concessions and catering companies.

Jolt Credit Union Event Park Facility History

Building The Event Park

The Dow Event Center, an ASM Global managed facility, announced on February 7, 2013, at a press conference along with Saginaw County & Great Lakes Bay Region Convention & Visitors Bureau plans to develop an outdoor event venue in the 300 block of Downtown Saginaw, where the Saginaw Center once stood. The venue, which would include a Pavilion, a main stage and a grassy area, as well as 225 parking spaces (400 block), was designed to attract a wide range of events and draw people to Downtown Saginaw.

The Pavilion provides a safe and economical place in the community for people of all ages and scopes from around the region to gather for a wide variety of events, performances, festivals and markets. It benefits the ‘sense of community’ feeling in Downtown Saginaw and also contributes to increased economic growth in the area.

Funding to build the Pavilion was estimated at $1.275 million. Additional funding was secured through Grants, Foundations, and Sponsorships including a Naming Rights sponsor for the venue.

SMG Awards FirstMerit Bank Naming Rights For Event Park

SMG announced the awarding of naming rights to the Event Park to FirstMerit Bank on May 2, 2013. The FirstMerit Event Park opened mid-August 2013. The 5,500-seat FirstMerit Event Park provided both pavilion and lawn seating for a variety of events meant to enrich the Great Lakes Bay Region. Events such as the second annual Wonderfest on August 24, 2013, and Fall In for Arts and Sol on September 28, 2013 were some of the first events held there. FirstMerit secured naming rights for the next five years.

Event Park Changes Names

FirstMerit Bank announced the changing of the Event Park's name on February 20, 2017 to Huntington Event Park as a result of the bank changing their name respectfully. As of April 12, 2022, Huntington Event Event park became known as Jolt Credit Union Event Park after another respectful name change after more than five years.

About ASM Global

ASM Global was formed in October 2019 from the merger of AEG Facilities , the global innovator in live entertainment venues, and SMG, the gold standard in event management. ASM Global is a venue management powerhouse that spans 5 continents, 14 countries and more than 300 of the world's most prestigious arenas, stadiums, convention and exhibit centers, and performing arts venues. As the world's most trusted venue manager, ASM Global provides venue strategy and management, sales, marketing, event booking and programming, construction and design consulting, and pre-opening services. Among the venues in our portfolio are landmark facilities such as McCormick Place & Soldier Field in Chicago, the Log Angeles Convention Center, Tele2 Arena in Stockholm, the Mercedez-Benz Superdome in New Orleans and the Shenzhen World Exhibition and Conference Centre in Shenzhen, China. ASM Global also offers food and beverage options through its concessions and catering companies.

BOX OFFICE Tickets for events at The Dow Event Center and Jolt Credit Union Event Park can be purchased in person at The Dow Event Center Box Office or Ticketmaster.com. 303 Johnson Street Saginaw, MI 48607 989-759-1330 Box Office Hours: Thursday - 10:00 a.m. - 2 p.m. Friday, 10:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. 2 hours prior to events on the weekend (subject to change) *Box office hours are subject to change and vary by event PURCHASING TICKETS Tickets can be purchased at Ticketmaster.com, Ticketmaster by phone 1-800-745-3000 or in person at The Dow Event Center Box Office during the hours listed above. The Dow Event Center is a walk-in facility only; no phone orders or online ticket sales. Tickets can be purchased using cash, Visa, MasterCard, Discover or American Express. Ticketmaster does charge convenience fees when purchasing tickets via online at Ticketmaster.com or by phone at 1-800-745-3000. To avoid these fees, please purchase in person at The Dow Event Center Box Office during the hours listed above. *Disclaimer: Tickets purchased by an unauthorized ticket distributor or third party may nor be valid and cannot be guaranteed by The Dow Event Center and Jolt Credit Union Event Park. MOBILE TICKETS You may not be able to print your tickets from home. If you do not have physical tickets, you will need to download the Ticketmaster mobile app by following these steps:

Download the Ticketmaster mobile app, available in the Google Play Store or the iTunes App Store

Log in using the email address and password associated with your Ticketmaster account

Within the app, go to "Events" and select your event to view your tickets

If you are an iPhone user, your next step is to tap "Add To Wallet" and you are done

If you are an Android user, you need to keep your tickets screen open as you approach the venue - or take a screenshot in case of connectivity issues

WILL CALL Will Call is located at the box office and is open 2 hours prior to each event held at The Dow Event Center and Jolt Credit Union Event Park. ADA ACCESSIBLE SEATING Accessible seating may purchased at The Dow Event Center Box Office. Fans that require accessible seating must request this in advance. Accessible seating is not guaranteed on the day of the event. Please call the box office at 989-759-1330 in advance for availability. GROUP DISCOUNTS Group discounts are available on select events. Please call 989-759-1323 or visit https://bit.ly/2lv1Qxj for more information.

Dow Event Center

303 Johnson Street Saginaw, MI 48607

Huntington Event Park

300 Johnson Street Saginaw, MI 48607

Parking at The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park

Parking charges for sporting & theater events vary by event. Call the Box Office for info on the parking costs (Box Office open Thursdays 10 a.m. - 2 p.m. and Fridays 10 a.m. - 5 p.m.). Our tiered parking ramp is located just across the street from The Dow Event Center & adjacent to Jolt Credit Union Event Park. The first floor of the ramp is reserved for handicapped parking. We also offer "VIP" event parking for slightly higher rate, as well as, handicapped parking in our front lot which is directly in front of the Dow Event Center. An additional flat parking lot is located next to Jolt Credit Union Event Park and at the southeast & southwest corners of Jefferson Avenue & Johnson Street. Note: Not all parking surrounding the venue is operated by SMG. Our parking lots will have signage stating "The Dow Event Center Parking".

Directions to The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park

Parking charges for sporting & theater events vary by event, payment is cashless. Call the Box Office for info on the parking costs:

Dow Event Center front lot, 303 Johnson

400 lot across from The Dow Event Center, 400 Johnson

Dow Event Center Parking Ramp

These are the only lots currently authorized by The Dow Event Center.

From the South

Take I-75 Northbound to the I-675 Downtown Exit

Take this route to the 5th and 6th Avenue Downtown Exit

Follow the service road you exit onto to North Washington

Turn left and travel to Johnson Street

The Dow Event Center is located on the Northeast corner of Washington and Johnson

Parking ramp on your right

The Jolt Credit Union Event Park is on your right; after the parking ramp

Alternate, From the South

Take Northbound M-52 to M-46

Turn right [East] and travel to M-13 (Washington Avenue)

Turn left [North] and travel to Johnson Street

The Dow Event Center is on your right and Jolt Credit Union Event Park is on your left

Parking ramp on your left

From the North

Take I-75 Southbound to the I-675 Downtown Exit

Exit at the Jefferson Street Downtown Exit

Take the first right off the exit ramp

Take a right onto Johnson Street, the Dow Event Center is on your right and the Jolt Credit Union Event Park is on your left

Parking ramp on your left.

From the East

Take M-46 West to Northbound I-75

Exit at the I-675 Downtown Exit and follow the directions above "From the South"

Alternate, From the East

Take M-81 West: M-81 will become M-13, which is North Washington in Saginaw

Travel to Johnson Street

The Dow Event Center is on your left

The Jolt Credit Union Event Park is on your right

From the West

Take Eastbound M-46 to M-13 (Washington Avenue in Saginaw)

Turn left [North] and travel to Johnson Street

The Dow Event Center is on your right

The Jolt Credit Union Event Park is on your left

Frequently Asked Questions About The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park

UPDATED SECURITY POLICY/PROHIBITED ITEMS LIST

UPDATED SECURITY POLICY/PROHIBITED ITEMS LIST

In the interest of everyone's safety, the following items may NOT be brought into The Dow Event Center or Jolt Credit Union Event Park:

No Guns, Knives Or Weapons Of Any Kind Including Pepper Spray, Mace & Toy Or Fake Weapons

No Fireworks Or Explosive Devices

Small clutches no larger than 4.5″ x 6.5″ x 2″ and clear, one-gallon bags for medical or parenting needs will be permitted. No bags, backpacks or purses, other than those required for medical or parenting needs, will be permitted into the venue.

No Outside Food Or Beverage Items

No Bottles, Cans, Glass Or Liquid Containers

No Alcohol Or Illegal Substances

No Aerosol Cans

No Professional Cameras (Detachable Lens)

No Selfie Sticks

No Professional Video Or Audio Recording Devices

No Electronic Equipment Including Computers, Tablets, GoPro Devices Or Tripods

No Animals (Except Service Animals)

No Laser Pointers

No Balloons (Air or Helium)

No Balls (Football, Basketballs, Beach Balls Etc.)

No Strollers

No Artificial Noisemakers

No Skateboards, Scooters, Hover Boards Or Personalized Vehicles

No Guests Without Shoes Or Shirts

No Large Umbrellas (Small Compact Umbrellas Will Be Allowed After Thorough Inspection)

No Drones

Any Other Items Deemed Unsafe By Venue Personnel

*All Guests Are Subject To A Search Of Coats & Bags And Will Be Required To Be Wanded Or Pass Through A Metal Detector.

*Additional Items May Be Added On An Event By Event Basis & Dictated By Event Personnel

*Please Contact The Dow Event Center/Jolt Credit Union Event Park In Advance Of The Event At 989-759-1320 With Any Questions Or Concerns. Office Is Open Monday-Friday, 9:00AM-5:00PM.

Clear Bags and Cashless Policy

Beginning September 28, The Dow Event Center will adopt a clear bag policy and go cashless for all events. Only credit cards and debit cards will be accepted at all points of purchase, including parking.

Small clear clutches no larger than 4.5" x 6.5" x 2" and clear, one-gallon bags for medical or parenting needs will be permitted.

No bags, backpacks or purses, other than those required for medical or parenting needs, will be permitted into the venue.

Bags in the medical/essential category will be screened by security personnel. Guests with parenting/medical bags must enter through the main entrance of the building to undergo additional security screening.

Where do I park?

The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park offers plenty of parking for each event hosted. Depending upon the extent of the event and how many guests are expected to attend, guests have the option of two main parking areas. The front lot of The Dow Event Center contains approximately 150 spaces including ADA approved handicapped spaces. Across the street from The Dow Event Center there is a parking garage and a flat lot adjoining Jolt Credit Union Event Park. The multiple level, ADA accessible parking facility features 1,323 spaces and can accommodate vehicles under the maximum height of 6’11”. Busses, semis and other oversized vehicles can also be accommodated for in additional flat lots. Click here for more parking information.

Is your facility ADA accessible?

Yes!! The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 provides recreation facilities, such as The Dow Event Center, with rules and guidelines to be sure all of our guests are able to enjoy events at The Dow & Jolt Credit Union Event Park! The seating options vary for individuals with specific needs. Please contact the Box Office ahead of the event date to get your specific seating questions answered at: 989-759-1330.

ADA accessible parking is available in the flat parking lot by The Jolt Credit Union Event Park as well as the first floor of the parking ramp and in our front lot which is located directly in front of The Dow Event Center. Guests may choose to pull their vehicle to the entrance doors to drop off an individual with ADA needs and then proceed to exit the parking lot to your paid parking spot.

Is standing allowed?

Everyone with a reserved ticket must be at their seat. Standing is not permitted in the aisles. Although some performances encourage standing, traditionally, audiences are seated during a performance indoors

What time do the doors open prior to an event?

For most events, The Dow Event Center opens doors one hour prior to event start time except OHL Hockey Saginaw Spirit which open one and half hours prior to their games. Jolt Credit Union Event Park doors open 1 hour prior to any concert event. For Jolt Credit Union Event Park Festivals & Community Events doors are open at the hours stated on your ticket. However, The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park would like their guests to be aware that there are also extenuating circumstances that may make it difficult to open doors promptly one hour before show time on every occasion. The Red Room events are at the time stated on your tickets, rare to have extended door time prior to the event.

What if I arrive after the performance starts?

Once the performance begins, our ushers maybe required to hold all latecomers outside the theater until instructed by the artist management to begin late seating.

How will I know if a show is cancelled due to weather or other circumstances?

In the unlikely event of a cancellation, ticket holders may be contacted via phone or email; however, other forms of media may be used to contact ticket holders, including local radio stations in the venue's surrounding area or the venue's social media sites. For more information visit our website or call the Box Office (989) 759-1330.

Are photography and/or recording devices allowed?

All audio, visual, and recording devices are strictly prohibited. Artist management reserves the right to permit photography with non-professional cameras and/or mobile phones. When possible, the camera policy will be communicated to ticket holders in advance or you may ask an usher upon arrival. We reserve the right to deny entry for inappropriate devices and will not store the devices for you.

Am I allowed to bring food/beverage into the facilities?

The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park is proud to feature excellent catering as well as concession stands during events. Therefore, no outside food or drink is permitted at The Dow Event Center or Jolt Credit Union Event Park. The only exception to this rule is the wedding cake for a reception held in The Red Room at The Dow Event Center.

Am I allowed to bring in a lawn chair to events in Jolt Credit Union Event Park?

Yes, lawn chairs are allowed at community events, festivals and concerts (no umbrellas) unless otherwise stated. For certain events, there may be reserved seating in which the venue provides chairs. Please check your ticket information or call our business office at (989) 759-1320 if you have a question on a particular event.

Am I allowed to bring drones into the facilities?

The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park does not allow the use of drones. The ban on drones starts one hour before and ends one hour after the scheduled time of any of our events. Drones are prohibited within a three-mile radius of the stadium or venues.

Am I allowed to smoke at the facilities?

There is no smoking permitted in any of The Dow Event Center facilities.

What fundraising opportunities exist for my group at your venue?

ASM Global's exclusive food service providers at The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park, desires to use local, non-profit service groups to staff the concession areas at the facility. This opportunity serves as an alternative to the traditional fundraising while developing teamwork in an exciting atmosphere. For more information please contact our Food & Beverage Department at (989) 759-1321.

How and where do I buy tickets?

Tickets for events at The Dow Event Center and Jolt Credit Union Event Park are available in person at The Dow Event Center box office located in the Atrium of The Dow Event Center. One can also purchase tickets through www.ticketmaster.com, and all Ticketmaster outlets.

What form of payment can I use?

Ticketmaster accepts several methods of payment including American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diner's Club. The Dow Event Center Box Office accepts Cash, Visa, MasterCard, American Express, and Discover. Checks are accepted only 7 days in advance of the show date for large group sales only: made out to "SMG Management II, LLC."

Does Ticketmaster have extra fees?

Yes there are convenience charges for Ticketmaster; however, you can visit our Box Office at The Dow Event Center to purchase tickets with little to no extra fees.

What does the seating chart look like?

Arena Seating Chart

Theater Seating Chart

Where is the best place to get my tickets?

The best place to buy your tickets is right at The Dow Event Center. Our Box Office is open Thursday 10:00AM - 2:00 PM and Friday 10:00AM – 5:00PM and 2 hours prior to each event held at The Dow Event Center. Convenience fees will apply for tickets purchased through any Ticketmaster location other than The Dow Event Center.

What are the box office hours?

The box office at The Dow Event Center is openThursday 10:00AM - 2:00PM and Friday 10:00AM – 5:00PM. The Box Office is also open for will call and ticket purchasing 2 hours prior to each event held at The Dow Event Center.

Click here for more information on Box Office

Does your venue have a lost and found? How do I contact them?

Yes our venues all have a lost and found. Lost and found items are logged and stored at The Dow Event Center Administrative Office for 45 days. For lost and found information, please contact (989) 759-1320 between the hours of 9:00AM-5:00PM, Monday-Friday.

Where is the first aid station located?

The first aid station is located in the arena on the east concourse (purple), by the front doors in the theater and side stage for the Jolt Credit Union Event Park. Medical attention may be called to your location by all event ushers.

What is the dress code for attending an event?

We have no set dress code policy, yet we reserve the right to deny entry for inappropriate dress.

How do I find out more information on group sales?

For group sales, please contact The Dow Event Center Box Office at (989) 759-1330.

How do I find out more information on donations and sponsorship for my own event?

Charitable Donations Guidelines - Click to view

How do I receive presale passwords, discount offers and upcoming event information?

Please sign up for our free email distribution list to receive emails on The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park upcoming events, discount codes and presale information.

Click Here to submit your information to get on the distribution list

Advertising

Job

Advertising and Sponsorship Opportunities at the Dow Event Center and Jolt Credit Union Event Park

Looking for a way to get in front of your customers and improve brand awareness?

The Dow Event Center, Jolt Credit Union Event Park and the Saginaw Spirit offers you this opportunity. For more information contact the Marketing Manager at (989) 759-1320.

Job Opportunities at The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park

Thank you for your interest in ASM Global, The Dow Event Center & Jolt Credit Union Event Park. We accept applications and resumes for posted positions ONLY through the website link below.

Click Here to view any openings

ASM Global is an Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action employer and encourages women, minorities, individuals with disabilities and protected veterans to apply. VEVRAA Federal Contractor.

<!--

The Dow Event Center and SMG are accepting resumes for student internships. Fill out this initial inquiry form to express your interest: contact-us

-->

We Welcome Your Comments or Questions... We Want to Hear From You!

Do you have any comments or questions for The Dow Event Center?

Want to know more about upcoming events?

Mailing Address:

The Dow Event Center

303 Johnson Street

Saginaw, MI 48607 Business Office: (989) 759-1320

Fax: (989) 759-1322

Box Office: (989) 759-1330

Contact Here

Whether celebrating life's special moments or looking for a unique venue for a party, meeting or special occasion, The Dow Event Center is the ideal location for your next social or corporate event. The Dow Event Center is a multipurpose venue, offering unique options for all size events and is conveniently located off I-675. Featuring an in-house caterer, audiovisual support and full service event planning, The Dow Event Center can help you customize your next event and make it an unforgettable experience! To schedule a private tour or to check availability for your upcoming event, please contact info@doweventcenter.com or call 989-759-1320.

OUR UNIQUE EVENT SPACES:

The Red Room

The Red Room is 120' x 80' venue located within The Dow Event Center. The newly renovated space features a permanent bar, stage and sound and lighting packages to enhance any event. The Red Room is utilized for larger events; such as wedding receptions, expos, fundraisers and much more.

Banquet Seating Capacity: 350

Theater Style Seating Capactiy: 780

Classroom Style Seating Capacity: 200

The Garden Room

The Garden Room is a 47' x 37' venue and it is an excellent location to host smaller banquets, bridal showers, business parties and meetings. Guests also have access to an outdoor patio that serves as a great alternative for picnics, ceremonies and additional pre-function space to socialize.

Banquet Seating Capacity: 80

Theater Style Seating Capactiy: 150

Classroom Style Seating Capacity: 50

The Theater Lobby

The lobby of the Theater at The Dow Event Center can be transformed to host private events; such as dinner parties, wedding receptions and much more. The Theater Lobby features a large staircase, a king chandelier and a large glass wall to allow plenty of daylight to shine on your event.

Banquet Seating Capacity: 100

Theater Style Seating Capacity: 230

Classroom Style Seating Capacity: 80

Catering Services:

SAVOR... by SMG is The Dow Event Center's premier caterer. Our full service banquet staff is available throughout your event as well as certified bartenders. We are able to accommodate any special menu requests, dietary needs and custom menu options. We offer a wide variety of menu options including plated meals and buffet packages with the option of having a hosted or cash bar. We also provide full service suite catering during select Arena functions including Saginaw Spirit hockey games.

Group Outings

90 Minute Power Play

Concessions

Bring your group to The Dow Event Center or Jolt Credit Union Event Park for your next outing! Make The Dow Event Center and Jolt Credit Union Event Park your place to get together! Take advantage of group savings on select events. Group sales are perfect for friends, family, company outings, schools, churches, clubs, nonprofit organizations, youth activities, senior centers and more. Your group will receive the best in service, convenience and efficiency. We'll handle the details for you, from reservations and tickets to special seating and pre-event parties. BENEFITS:

Discounts on regular-priced tickets (available on select events)

Convenient payment options

Preferred seating

Advanced event notification

Personalized service

Rent the Party Deck at Jolt Credit Union Event Park for concerts and other events! Whether it is a company team building function, church outing or a reunion, renting the Party Deck at Jolt Credit Union Event Park is a great way to eat, drink and enjoy the excitement of our outdoor concerts and events! BENEFITS:

Exclusive access to the Party Deck

Private service

Convenient payment options

Preferred seating

Advanced event notification

Personalized service

For more information, please call 989-759-1323 or fill out the form below.

The Dow Event Center and the Saginaw Spirit are teaming up to bring you the new 90 Minute Power Play in The Red Room before each regular season home game! The 90 Minute Power Play offers fans a chance to grab select concessions items at reduced prices before the game. Held exclusively in The Red Room (when available), the 90 Minute Power Play is open to anyone with a ticket to that night's game. When The Red Room is unavailable, the 90 Minute Power Play will be held on the east concourse behind section 1. The 90 Minute Power Play features:

$2 Hot Dogs

$2 20 oz. pop or water

$2 12 oz domestic draft beer

$1 Candy

$1 Chips

Plus - Sports On The Big Screens

The Dow Event Center provides a variety of food and beverage options that will make for a delicious meal or snack for you and your family. Concession classics such as popcorn, hotdogs, nachos and pretzels are offered along with grilled foods and a range of specialty vendors such as Dippin' Dots, K&R Almonds and Jet's Pizza. On hockey nights, The Red Room offers a private club atmosphere for Spirit fans prior to doors opening to the arena. Fans witness interviews with the coaches and players, listen to live bands or watch national sporting events on two large projector screens, making their experience at the Spirit an all around, full-night of entertainment. Concessions At The Dow Event Center Arena:

Concession Stands: all stands provide an assortment of food, Pepsi products and other concessions favorites.

The Grill: located on the south concourse behind section 15, is equipped with a grill and offers delicious cheeseburgers, chicken tenders, chicken wraps, popcorn, nachos, pretzels, french fries, and more.

Jet's Pizza: located on the south concourse behind section 17 and offers whole pizzas, pizza by the slice, turbo stix Pepsi products and alcoholic beverages.

The Snack Shack: located on the north concourse behind section 10, will allow you to experience our hotdogs, draft beers, fountain soft drinks, popcorn, soft pretzels, nachos, coffee, hot chocolate along with a variety of other items to please your taste buds.

Dippin' Dots: serves freeze-dried ice cream in an assortment of flavors and is located at The Snack Shack and Jet's Pizza stand.

K&R Almonds: located on the east concourse behind section 2, offers an array of roasted nuts, almonds and candy.

Red Room Bar: located on the east concourse behind section 1 and offers beer, liquor and wine.

*Concessions selection may vary by event. Concessions At The Dow Event Center Theater: Standard concessions are available in both the downstairs and upstairs of The Dow Event Center Theater depending on the event. Concessions selection may include popcorn, nachos, hotdogs, pretzels, beer and more. A full service bar can be found in the Garden Room or theater lobby. *Concessions selection may vary by event.