1. Industry study- Paramount Pictures By Alex Senior

2. History Paramount Pictures is an American film and television production company, the company has been ranked the fourth oldest production company in existence. Initially founded in 1916 by Adolph Zukor and Jesse L. Lasky; both of these men were fellow film enthusiasts and amateur film producers. After the founding of Paramount Pictures the company quickly established itself as a key player in progressing market, which was just beginning to make its mark on the world. Before the creation of paramount the film production market was very mundane, films were only distributed within the same states. Hardly ever crossing borders into new territories, after the creation of paramount pictures this principle was soon destroyed. Paramount became the first production company to market and produce films for entire nations, this proved to be a revolutionary factor which changed the way the business worked. Since its formation Paramount Pictures has become one of the biggest film production companies in the world, it has manufactured a global conglomerate which includes the animation company: DreamWorks. So far Paramount has produced $1.2 billion (£ 74,229,8400.00) in revenue, showing the scale it has achieved.

3. Existing products-The Firm Year of production: 1993 Cast: Tom Cruise, Gene Hackman, Jeanne Tripplehorn Certificate: 15 Synopsis: a young Harvard law graduate is pursued by his employers when he discovers the truth about them. Gradually he begins to uncover a web of lies and deceit, this begins a race against time to avoid capture and reveal the truth. Director: Sydney Pollack Run time: 154 minutes

4. Existing products-Marathon man Year of production:1976 Cast: Dustin Hoffman, Laurence Olivier, Roy Scheider Certificate:18 Synopsis: a university students who is training to run a marathon becomes tangled in his FBI brother’s case, he is pursued by a surviving Nazi who is trying to survive in America without revealing his true identity and sell his diamonds. Director: John Schlesinger Run time: 125 minutes

5. Industry regulation-BBFC A film production company has to meet regulations outlined by various agency, to ensure that the public remain safe and comfortable when watching films. One of these regulation bodies is the BBFC (British Board of Film Classification), the BBFC is responsible for ensuring that all of the films broadcasted in the UK meet the age certificate requirements they formulated. Age certificates tell consumers who the film is appropriate for, and therefore parents are very unlikely to show a 5 year old a film with an 18 certificate. There a 6 age certificates which govern the age group that the film is appropriate for, the certificates are: •U •PG •12 •12A •15 •18

6. Production process Every production company has to follow a ritualistic process when they produce a film, time is factor that governs how they work therefore using a certified process is a very attractive concept. The Production process consists of a number of steps, these steps are: •Pre-production-a story board, which is basically a plan of how the events are going to occur is produced. The script which has been created at an earlier stage will be given to the cast and crew members, and the casting process begins. The production designer will be given the task of planning the sets which need to be created for filming stage. If the film incorporates any specialised shots which include special effects, the special effects department will have to plan these shots. Finally an advert is planned and formulated, to start the marketing process and gather public attention. •Filming stage-the shooting of the film begins, the lighting, sound and make up departments are activated. The various actors involved with the project begin to perform their role, the meticulously planned special effects are created by the special effects department. Furthermore while these processes are being performed the producers will keep a close eye on the events from the background.

7. Production process continued Post-production-the editors responsible for formulating the narrative create the narrative sequence, the sound department is given the task of editing the sound. The titles and credits which will be used at the start and end of the film are created, the main colour scheme and appearance of the film is decided and edited. The final sound checks are performed, and finally the director is allowed to create their own personal cut (director’s cut).

8. Distribution process The distribution process is a crucial part of a film production company’s role, they have to ensure that the film is distributed correctly and to the appropriate distributers. This process is carried out in a number of steps, these steps are: •The production company will be to communicate with a distributor about potential deals. •If this is successful the distributor will negotiate with the production company and decide how many units they would like to distribute. •Next potential cinema owners and exhibitionists are given a chance to watch the film and provide the distributor with their opinion as to whether or not the film will be successful. •If the buyers like to the film they will arrange a deal with the distributor about showcasing the movie. •After the launch of the film the cinemas and exhibitionists will send their copies of the film back to distributor and provide them with payment for having the ability to showcase the film.

9. Marketing Marketing is a process which every film production company has to perform, marketing gathers publicity for the project which will eventually lead to ticket sales and successful deals with distributors. There are a number of steps which have to be performed in order to complete this process, for example: •Hiring a sales agent. •Showing ‘test screenings’ to the public, this allows the production company to make alterations if there any of the film which aren’t popular. • Releasing posters, trailers and marketing devices the public to generate interest in the film. This will make some members of the public decide that they would like to see the film when it is released. •Utilizing ‘word of mouth’, a free type of marketing which is very in influential in social scenarios and can help to generate lots of extra profit. On the other hand it can ruin a films reputation. • Using internet marketing to appeal to a larger audience, creates a larger marketing campaign. Successful viral campaigns could be formed as a result of this technique.

10. Established examples-The Godfather The Godfather is one of the greatest films ever made, since its release in 1972 it has amassed a huge following and won a collection of awards (including 3 Oscars). The godfather can be described as one of paramount’s greatest ever achievements, this showcases what this company is capable of when it performs at its optimum level. The film generated $246, 066, 411 in profit (£151, 332, 319.16). Year of production: 1972 Cast: Marlon Brando, Al Pacino and James Caan Certificate:15 Director: Francis Ford Copolla Run time:175