Born in Old Town, Maine in 1949, Tabitha King (nee Spruce) is recognized by many simply for being the wife of legendary horror novelist Stephen King, as well as the mother of their three children two of whom—Joe Hill and Owen King—are also acclaimed horror authors.

But Tabitha is no mere wife and mother. An established author herself, she has been publishing books nearly as long as her famous husband, and has accrued a number of accolades on her own merits.

Tabitha met Stephen while the two were attending college at the University of Maine, and they were married in 1971. At that time, Tabitha Spruce (as she was still known then) had a work-study job at the Raymond H. Fogler Library, which is how she came to meet her future husband. He has since said that the two married “because of the fish that she cooked for me”—at least as he told it to Bon Appetit magazine.

There’s obviously more to the pair’s relationship than Tabitha winning Stephen's heart through his stomach, however. They’ve stayed together for more than 50 years, through poverty, through Stephen King’s alcoholism and substance abuse troubles, and through the 1999 car accident that nearly cost King his life. What we usually hear about is how Stephen King wrote throughout it all—what we hear less of is that Tabitha King kept writing, too.

When you’re the partner of someone who achieves the kind of fame that Stephen King has as an author, it's easy for the greater public to downplay your literary contributions. Yet, from 1981—with the publication of her first novel—until the present day, Tabitha King has continually published fiction and nonfiction of her own—including novels, short stories, teleplays, and more. She was hand-picked by the family of Michael McDowell to finish his last book, Candles Burning, which remained incomplete upon his death in 1999. The finished version, finalized by Tabitha King, was published in 2006.

Over the years, Tabitha King has racked up her own list of accolades, including winning the Constance H. Carlson Public Humanities Prize in 1998, and gaining an honorary doctorate in humane letters from the University of Maine. She has also worked tirelessly on philanthropic and social activist causes, including literacy programs and serving on the board of the Bangor Public Library and the Public Broadcasting System of Maine.

While Tabitha King’s literary output has often been overshadowed by the men in her life, we thought it was high time we shine a spotlight on some of the chilling, enticing, and un-put-downable novels that she has written over the years.