Honorary Doctor and Nobel Laureate lectured on quantum mechanics

Recently, Anton Zeilinger, Professor Emeritus and Nobel Laureate in Physics, was promoted to Honorary Doctor at Linköping University. In connection with the ceremony, Professor Zeilinger also offered a technical lecture.

“It’s incredible to receive such an award”

Seetha Murty has committed her career to children’s and young people’s learning. She is now an honorary doctor of philosophy at LiU.“It’s amazing! When you put your heart into something and receive such an award, it feels very good,” she says.

Academic Celebration with space journey and Harry Potter

This year’s Academic Celebration at Linköping University will take place on 31 May and 1 June. The Celebration will feature lectures by honorary doctors, including astronaut Marcus Wandt, and an Academic Gala Concert with a children’s world theme.

Two champions for children become honorary doctors

Indian principal Seetha Murty has worked with children’s and young people’s learning throughout her professional life. American professor Cindy W. Christian has devoted her career to developing the care of abused children.

An astronaut and a Nobel laureate are new honorary doctors at LiU

The Swedish astronaut Marcus Wandt and the Austrian quantum physicist and Nobel laureate Anton Zeilinger have been appointed honorary doctors at the Faculty of Science and Engineering at Linköping University.

Honorary doctors: resource-effective region and holistic view on health

LiU will promote two new honorary doctors at the Academic Ceremony in May. They are Charlotta Sund, president and CEO of the company Tekniska Verken, and Lennart Nordenfelt, senior professor in Theory and Ethics of Health Care.

New honorary doctors: one CEO, one furniture designer, three researchers

Lena Miranda, CEO of Linköping Science Park, is awarded an honorary doctorate. She will receive the award, together with furniture designer Åke Axelsson and international researchers Lucy Henry, Barbara Riegel and Arnold Tukker, in November 2022.

Honorary doctors boost LiU’s research

Seven international researchers who have each contributed to research at Linköping University (LiU) are to become honorary doctors. The ceremony where they are to be promoted will take place on 21 May 2022, during the spring’s Academic Ceremony.

Honorary doctor from Sudan fighting for women in academia

Physics researcher and LiU master's alumna Nashwa Eassa has a vision – that women in Sudan will gain equal opportunities for education and research as men. At Linköping University’s annual Academic Ceremony, she was awarded an honorary doctorate.

Honorary doctors put spotlight on depression and suicide

The two new honorary doctors for 2018 at the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences have both experience of depression and suicide. Niklas Ekdal was rescued after a suicide attempt. Pia Minati's young daughter Magdalena took her own life.