With a new introduction by author Robert Silverberg, and the first-ever map of Borthan, this Nebula Award-winning classic sci-fi novel A Time of Changes, out of print since 1992, will delight fans of dystopian fiction

In the far future, Earth is a worn-out backwater and humanity is spread across the galaxy on worlds that began as colonies, but now feel like home, each with its own long history of a thousand years or more, and each with its own unique culture. One of the strangest is on Borthan, where the founding settlers established the Covenant, which teaches that the self is to be despised, and forbids anyone to reveal his innermost thoughts or feelings to another. On Borthan, the filthiest obscenities imaginable are the words "I" and "me."

For the heinous crime of "self-baring," apostates have always paid with exile or death, but after his eyes are opened by a visitor from Earth, Kinnall Darival, prince of Salla, risks everything to teach his people the real meaning of being human.

At the Publisher's request, this title is being sold without Digital Rights Management Software (DRM) applied.

Praise for this book

“Robert Silverberg's versatile, skeptical intelligence controls a lavish and splendid imagination. A Time of Changes is a canny fable of freedom and the ecstatic communion of souls.” —Ursula K. Le Guin

“No matter if Silverberg is dealing with material that is practically straight fiction, or going way into the future . . . his is the hand of a master of his craft and imagination.” —Los Angeles Times on A Time of Changes

About the Author

A SFWA Grand Master and the winner of five Hugo Awards and five Nebula Awards, ROBERT SILVERBERG author of the bestselling Majipoor series and dozens of other books, is one of the giants of science fiction and fantasy. He lives in Oakland, California, with his wife, writer Karen Haber.

Title: A Time of Changes

Author(s): Robert Silverberg

ISBN: 9781429967914

Copyright 2009

Release Date: April 27, 2009

Publisher: Tor Publishing Group

Countries: United States, Canada | Learn more about available countries

Language: English

Format: mobi,ePub | Learn More about our supported formats

Dragonmount is a proud provider of DRM-free eBooks. By purchasing any eBook from our store, you are not only helping support our website, but you are helping small businesses thrive in a market traditionally dominated by large companies. Learn more in our eBook FAQ.