Guns are a common sight in movies. Everyone has one no matter what their status is. It is far from reality in many cases. At the national level, the United States of America – considered to be a country where guns are easier to buy than a loaf of bread – requires every legal citizen and resident buying a firearm to undergo a federal level Form 4473 background check (and specifically excludes felons from legally owning firearms) and adhere to the National Firearms Act of 1934, Gun Control Act of 1968, and Gun Control Act of 1986 which restricts and/or bans sale of certain firearms and parts – including but not limited to machineguns, short barrel rifles, short barrel shotguns, “destructive devices,” and silencers (legal definition) – to civilians. This is before reading into the chaotic, headache-inducing, lawyer-language laws each individual state, each district and municipality, and individual towns and cities have.

So, when I watched Tomb Raider (2018), there was no doubt in my mind that there were United Kingdom gun laws being broken when Lara Croft (Alicia Vikander) picked up the iconic pair of Heckler & Koch USP Matches.

At the end of the film Lara went back to the shady pawn dealer (Nick Frost) to get back her pendent she pawned at the beginning of the film, and she notices a case full of firearms. According to the United Kingdom’s Firearms Amendments Act of 1997, everything in that gun case is illegal.

Besides needing a license for firearms, the rifles must have a barrel 12-inches or longer and an overall length of 60-inches or longer. Centerfire rifles must be single-shot or manually operated (e.g. bolt action, lever action) and semi-automatics can only be in .22 rimfire. So, the AUG, UMP, and HK416 in the case are illegal.

As for the handguns in the case, Section 1 for civilians of the Firearms Amendments Act of 1997 (FAA 1997) provide the legality of “carbine” ownership which requires carbines to have a barrel length of 12-inches or more and an overall length of 24-inches or more. “Handguns” were stretched to fit the definition of “carbine” by adding a 12-inch barrel (usually covered by a fake suppressor) and adding an armrest/counterweight of sorts to increase the overall length. Again, it must be manually operated or in .22 rimfire. Thus, all the handguns and the Uzi and MP7 in that case are illegal for typical UK civilian ownership.

Section 5 of the FAA 1997 covers all types of firearms that would be typically illegal for a regular UK citizen to own; firearms restricted to military and law enforcement only. Civilians can be issued restricted firearms, but only under a “good reason.” Self-defense is not considered a valid reason. A valid reason for getting a Section 5 firearm is to be a deer dispatcher or euthanizer to put a deer down after it was injured by getting hit by a vehicle. So, Lara could technically be able to buy the USP Matches, but she does not have a legitimate reason for a Section 5 ownership, and claiming that she is hunting a mercenary organization that wants to take over the world will not work. Also, it was established several times that Nick Frost’s character is a shady pawn dealer, so it is unlikely he will have the proper licenses to possess and sell the firearms he has in the case.

Another way Lara could get her hands on the USP Matches is to follow Section 7(1) of the FAA 1997, but this legislation is only for collectibles that cannot be shot which means the USP Matches have to be deactivated by having their moving parts pinned and some essential components removed or “modified,” essentially destroying the guns. Not very useful for fighting down mercenaries.

Section 7.3 of the FAA 1997 would allow Lara to own specific firearms, including some restricted firearms, but these firearms must be for academic/research purposes only and must be kept and stored at a specific location, such as an official Section 7.3 gun club. If her mansion gets attacked like in the 2001 film Lara Croft: Tomb Raider, she’d be out of luck. Of course, Lara could smuggle the guns she needs out of the club, but that would still be illegal.

Almost every action in the closing scene of Tomb Raider (2018), Lara Croft has committed or will have to commit firearm involved felonies in every possible in order to achieve her goal of hunting down mercenaries according to the United Kingdom Firearms Amendments Act of 1997. Of course, that does not stop her from going onto the black market for weapons, but the way Nick Frost’s character has stored his firearms would have him arrested in no seconds flat.

But Tomb Raider (2018) ignoring contemporary laws is a reminder that films are a product of fiction and not a portrayal of reality.