WESTFORD — In an emotional meeting yesterday, shareholders of Digital Equipment

Corp. voted to sell the computer company to Compaq, formally ending the industry pioneer's independence.

About 72 percent of shareholders voted to approve the deal, erasing the last hurdle to the $9 billion merger and making Compaq Computer Corp. the second largest computer maker in the world, behind IBM.

Compaq faces a big challenge in swallowing Digital, the technology industry's largest-ever acquisition.

Compaq also is absorbing Tandem Computer, which it bought for $3 billion last year. And late yesterday Compaq said it won't make money for the second quarter in a row this year - excluding unspecified costs of combining operations with Digital.

Compaq chief financial officer Earl Mason said in a statement the combined entity could return to profitability by late this year.

Digital shareholders did accept the acquisition quietly. Several current and past employees rose to express their anger towards senior management at the relentless downsizing the company has endured in recent years.

"We are here to warn future management and shareholders that employees are sick of layoffs and ready to fight for their jobs," said Derek Lee, to the cheers of the crowd.

Lee, who spoke on behalf of Digital's 20,000 European workers, warned of looming "social unrest" if Compaq lays off additional workers in Europe.

As many as 15,000 workers, or one-quarter of Digital's remaining workforce, could be given pink slips.

Despite the tough years, the attachment Digital employees have for the company was evident yesterday as some of the many who came to the meeting cried.

Under the merger deal, shareholders will receive $30 a share in cash and 0.945 Compaq shares for each Digital share.

The companies have so far refused to specify where job cuts will be made, although they are expected to take place over the next year.

John Rando, who heads Digital's prized services division, was selected to be Compaq's senior vice president and group manager, services, which means Digital's services group will stay in Stow, Mass.

Compaq aims to use Digital to expand into high-end corporate computers and to strengthen its presence in the lucrative business of helping companies set up, run and service their networks.

— —

169 1998 Cape Cod Times. All rights reserved.