Compaq sets up Indian company

Compaq Computer Corporation has announced the setting up of a wholly-owned subsidiary, Compaq Computer (India) Private Limited, in the country.

With the setting up of the Indian company, Compaq now has 40 subsidiaries worldwide.

Announcing the formation of the Indian subsidiary, Abhishek Mukherjee, managing director, CCIPL, said that Bangalore would remain as the

T O D A Y • Banking on IT

• Compaq company

• Zero duties promised

• Aptech deal

• Unique IBM centre

technology headquarters of the company while the newly set up Delhi office would take care of the sales and marketing functions.

He also announced the opening of new offices in Bombay and Calcutta.

According to Mukherjee, the Indian subsidiary represents Compaq's long-term commitment to its customers, channel and business partners in India. The cumulative investment of Compaq in the region till date has been around $20 million, he revealed.

In the span of three years of domestic operations, he claimed, Compaq has been successful in replicating its global model of channel marketing in India and has developed a two-tier channel structure comprising over 300 reseller and service provider partners.

"In 1997, Compaq's focus area has been on education projects and in that regard we propose to provide computer facilities in schools and other educational institutions. Compaq will also establish local hot-line support facilities, critical spares stores to make it easy for Compaq users to get information on its products and how to buy and use its products."

Earlier, the vice-president and managing director, Asia-Pacific, of Compaq Computer Asia/Pacific, Paul Chan, outlined the reasons for setting up a subsidiary in India. He pointed out that Compaq understands the potential that India presents for its products and stated that the Indian market is the fastest growing market in the Asia-Pacific after the Chinese market.

On the timing of the decision, Chan said that in the last three years Compaq's Indian operations have focused on building domestic infrastructure as well as the brand.

With the Compaq brand gaining market acceptance, the Indian subsidiary will be the ideal platform for future growth, he added.

Answering a query on why there is a new-found interest among computer manufacturers to focus on educational institutions, Chan said that educating and training young minds is the foundation for a better future that would enable them to compete effectively in the globalised world.