Where is Aosta Italy?

Aosta is in the heart of the Valle d’Aosta & is overlooked by the Pila ski resort. Located in north west Italy, Aosta is 110km by road north of Turin, Italy and only 150km south-east of Geneva, Switzerland. The Valle d’Aosta is surrounded by western Europe’s highest mountains including Monta Blanc & the Monte Rosa massif, and borders Switzerland to the north & France to west. Despite the high peaks, much of the valley is well below 1000m elevation, providing a pleasant base for exploring the area.

Flights to Aosta

The main international gateway airports are Milan Malpensa (MXP) (170km by road) & Geneva (GVA) in Switzerland. Turin (TRN) airport serves some European & UK flight origins.

Search & book a flight to Milan Malpensa, Turin, Geneva or other European airport.

Airport & Hotel Transfers

Private transfers are available from all airports and hotels to Aosta & for larger groups can be quite time & cost effective. Powderhounds always recommends taking public transport to ski resorts & towns where it exists & Aosta certainly is a major train & bus hub. If you cannot abide public transport or have the cash to splash a private transfer makes sense.

Search & book your transfer direct to Aosta or nearby ski resort.

Driving to Aosta

Driving to the Aosta valley is exceptionally simple via the magnificent E25 motorway (autostrade). It runs through the Valle d'Aosta, past the city of Aosta, before heading west to France via the Mont Blanc Tunnel or east to Turin and Milan. Travel time from the city centre or airport at Milan is around 2hr. Due to the relatively low elevation of the valley (generally from 500 to 1200m altitude), many of the lower roads can seem deceptively devoid of snow through the season. Aosta city is only at 600m altitude (& is often snowless) so can lull one into a false sense of security when the sun is shining! Most secondary roads leading up out of the valley gain elevation quickly & are incredibly narrow. Add snow & ice to the mix and driving here can be challenging!

The Mont Blanc Tunnel connects the Valle d’Aosta to France via the Chamonix valley. As with most major tunnels in Europe, it carries a hefty toll to traverse it. Note that the autostrades are toll roads. It is possible to ‘pay as you go’. It is also possible to avoid the tolls altogether by taking secondary roads, which whilst more scenic, is time consuming & can be difficult on heavy snow days.

Aosta can also be reached via the Grand St Bernard Tunnel from Switzerland. The tunnel has a hefty toll but is a quick way to reach Italy from Geneva or Verbier.

Once in Aosta, the old town is closed to all traffic & you will have to park outside the 'walls'.

Aosta Car Rental

Car hire & rental is available at several locations and is generally unbelievably cheap. Milan Malpensa airport is an excellent car rental location as it avoids driving through major cities and has direct access to motorways all the way to the Valle d'Aosta. The Turin airport provides the best alternative opportunity in the region, but for reasons outlined below, if driving in around the Aosta is the goal, one may be better off hiring a fully winterised car from Switzerland at Geneva or the like.

The Aosta city centre & nearby small local airport has car rentals available for those already in the city. Ensure the rental is an All-Wheel-Drive (AWD) with snow tyres and chains - most aren’t!

A word of caution, however. Whilst renting cars in Italy is cheap, most are not winterised or generally fit for snow driving. Most only come with chains and little else. Snow tyres, AWD, winterised diesel fuel, washer fluid & window cleaning devices are mostly lacking. Clarify these items are in/on the car already.

For hints, tips & warnings about getting to Italian ski resorts in winter, see our Travel in Italy page.

Search & book all rental cars by location, availability & rate.

Train & Bus Transport to Aosta

The city and valley of Aosta is well served by train & bus transport. A railway line from Chivasso (on the Milan-Turin line) terminates at Aosta. The train provides a relaxing & scenic journey but is relatively slow. Along the railway line, several stations provide access to numerous Aosta valley ski areas. For Cervinia, the station at Chatillon - Saint Vincent connects with buses to the resort. For Monterosa there are two options. Up to Champoluc one alights at Verres. For Gressoney, the Pont St Martin station is the required stop.

Buses from the centre of Turin & Milan Malpensa airport also make several trips per day to Aosta (& on to Courmayeur).

Taxis & buses at the central bus station provides links to accommodation, local villages & the nearby Pila ski resort village. The central bus station is located across the road from the train station.

Search & book bus & train public transport options to Aosta .

Travel to Nearby Ski Resorts

Whilst Pila is on the city of Aosta's doorstep, if basing oneself in the city, the other Valle d'Aosta ski resorts are best visited using a rental car. Buses & private transfers are the alternative, but day trips using either method will be long, problematic or both!

Two Valle d'Aosta ski resorts are interlinked with international skiing areas. Cervinia is linked with its famous neighbour in Switzerland, Zermatt. Lesser known is the link between La Thuile & the French Tarentaise ski resort of La Rosiere.

Away from the Aosta Valley, a couple of major ski resort options are possible, but both have expensive tunnel usage fees to get to them. West in France a short drive from Courmayeur is the ski mecca of Chamonix, whilst north of Aosta is Verbier and several smaller Swiss ski resorts. Chamonix is a short journey via the Mont Blanc Tunnel, Verbier is via the Grand San Bernard Tunnel.

If driving oneself, be prepared to pay an exorbitant fee for the privilege of transiting the tunnels. Regular bus services make the journey from Courmayeur to Chamonix and can work out cheaper depending on how many are in the group.