Udupi: Outstanding performers in the 2022-23, X and XII, the rank holders of the Diocese of Udupi gathered in Anugraha, along with their proud parents in Ambagilu today, Sunday, 8th October, 2023, at 10.00 am as the ‘Catholic Sabah Udupi Pradesh’ arranged Prathibha Puraskar, sponsored by philanthropist, a well known Banker Mr John D’Silva and family.

The convenor of the beautiful event and the former Principal of Milagres College, Kallianpur Dr Jerald Pinto in his welcoming address, highlighted the concern and vision of Mr D’Silva Family for youth, as he is doing this charitable works almost since a decade.

Two distinct achievers in Dr Cinderella Gonsalves, Ph. D. and CA Joseph D’Costa Chartered Accountant, both hailing from Kundapur were felicitated on this occasion as President Designate Mr Ronald D’Almeida gave a brief and crispy introduction, to the audience and Bishop of Udupi led the honour with draping traditional shawl and memento.

Rt Rev Dr Gerald Isaac Lobo, the Bishop of Udupi, in his address, – ‘Our children achieved a lot in academia as well as in sports, our youth are visibly seen in services – health and education, industry as professionals…in these years unfortunately not in Govt jobs – as IAS, IPS, IFS, KAS etc including Armed forces, not long ago our ancestors made a big impact as honest, courageous and impartial officers in Govt at both State and Union…’ . He gave a clarion call to the brilliant students who were assembled here, ‘to make up their minds to serve the nation by accepting these challenges’, he urged.

To continue and sharing the concern and sentiments of Bishop, the main sponsor of this programme Mr John D’Silva spoke about the need for people to aspire for higher education in the fields they are passionately attached and promised all sorts of help and guidance at this direction.

Catholic Sabah deservedly honoured Mr & Mrs John Gladys D’Silva on this occasion for their contribution to the society in general and for education and children in particular.

The Chief Guest of the event Mr Charles Lobo, IAS, narrated his own journey in public life. Earlier, he gave the names and contributions of yester years model officers whose spectacular achievements inculcated attraction and as policy makers how one can bring change in the society…

He gave examples of Adhar Card, Mid day Meal; Indira Canteen how these schemes chalked out by bureaucrats brought transformation in the life of masses… While elaborating the entry into Govt service, he compared it with popular KBC (Kaun Banega Crorepathi). There is no short cut but hard work he opined, but the satisfaction once you crack the exam hurdle, then its heaven of opportunities with enormous power, authority and public respect. It’s a wonderful ordeal to listen to Mr Lobo as he quoted how it was possible to serve for people in various places and states in different offices of repute.

Spiritual Director and Vicar General of the Diocese Msgr Fardinand Gonsalves, had all his praises to young achievers, congratulated them as well as their parents , teachers on the one hand and on the other, John D’Silva family and Catholic Sabah for organising this beautiful event.

Then the much awaited distribution of awards, certificates, cash prizes to youngsters who scored highest marks in SSLC and PU Exams. Respective Secretaries of Varado of Karkal, Udupi, Kallianpur, Kundapur and Shirva read out the names of the achievers with their brief introduction to the audience.

Udupi Pradesh President Mr Santhosh Carnelio in his Presidential speech, profusely thanked Mr John D’Silva and his family for initiating this unique charitable service to the students to encourage and notice their excellent academic records. He observed this programme definitely have long lasting impacts in the life of teens and youth. Mr Cornelio took the opportunity to thank all worked in the planning and process and its execution at different levels.

Gen Secretary, Mrs Olivia D’Mello, proposed vote of thanks and all guests were served with delicious lunch by the organisers.