“The time will come when England will regard this island as the Gibraltar of America.”-Sir Robert Bond,Newfoundland Prime Minister, 1890.

The Second World War and the subsequent arrival of thousands of American and Canadian military personnel marked a tremendous turning point in Newfoundland’s history. On the day the war began, 3 September 1939, Newfoundland was a dispirited, bankrupt, and defenseless British dominion-in-abeyance off the east coast of Canada. Its under-educated and under-employed population was ruled by a London-appointed Commission of Government, and the Colony was kept afloat by loans and grants from the British Treasury. Despite being intensely loyal, and in disregard of its tremendous sacrifice during the Great War (the Royal Newfoundland Regiment), Newfoundland was seen as the Cinderella of the British Empire. This changed in the summer of 1940 with Nazi Germany’s victorious Blitzkrieg through Western Europe.

Britain alone stood defiant, and on the other side of the Atlantic, Newfoundland was now viewed, not only as Canada’s “first line of defense” but actually “the key to the western defence system.” In a very short time, Newfoundland boasted five military and civilian aerodromes, two naval bases, two seaplane bases, and five army bases, and tens of thousands of Canadian and American military personnel were posted from coast to coast and in Labrador. Despite the historic animosity between the two countries, the unprecedented economic and social repercussions of this “friendly invasion” during the Second World War ultimately led to Newfoundland’s decision to join the Canadian confederation in 1949.

Canada made the commitment to defend Newfoundland even before that country entered the war against Germany. Whereas Ottawa once considered Newfoundland nothing more than “a liability” and "a nuisance," Canada now saw its sister dominion as an “essential Canadian interest” and an important part of the “Canadian orbit.” Indeed, Prime Minister Mackenzie King argued in September 1939 that not only was the defense of Newfoundland “essential to the security of Canada” but guaranteeing the Colony’s integrity would actually assist Britain’s war effort.

Regardless, the Canadian government did not act on that promise until the German victory in Europe. After the fall of France in June 1940, Ottawa dispatched the 1st Battalion of the Black Watch of Canada (on board the SS Antonia) along with five Douglas Digby bombers from RCAF No. 10 Squadron (with personnel) to Newfoundland to protect the Botwood seaplane base and the Newfoundland Airport (Gander), both developed by the British and Newfoundland governments to take advantage of the burgeoning trans-Atlantic passenger service trade.

Shortly thereafter, Canadian contractors started building Camp Lester on the outskirts of St. John’s - Newfoundland’s capital city - and the newly appointed Commander, Combined Newfoundland and Canadian Military Forces, Brigadier P Earnshaw arrived in November. By the end of 1940, close to 800 men from the Canadian 53rd Infantry Battalion were spread throughout the capital city and area, ready for any German air or sea attack. Canadian Army personnel eventually also protected Lewisporte (seen as the most likely insertion point for an enemy attack on the Newfoundland Airport at Gander), Rigolet (at the entrance to Lake Melville, Labrador) and the Goose Bay Air Station (at the western end of Lake Melville, and the largest airport in the world by 1943), plus manned numerous artillery, radio, and radar installations along the coast of Newfoundland and Labrador.

The Royal Canadian Navy (RCN) also arrived in Newfoundland during 1940 and set up a Naval Examination Service to control shipping entering St. John’s Harbour. By summer 1942, the Canadians had turned St. John's into a well-defended port and home to the Mid-Ocean Escort Force (MOEF), as the Newfoundland Escort Force (NEF) was renamed in February 1942. This force, under Admiral Leonard Murray RCN, protected the vital trans-Atlantic convoys to Britain, and numbered approximately 70 warships, including British and American escorts based out of the US naval base at Argentia, Placentia Bay. By 1943, there were some 5,000 RCN personnel at St. John’s, not including the thousands of ships’ crew that were billeted at the Buckmasters’ Field Naval Barracks. The RCN eventually developed facilities at Harbour Grace, Bay Bulls, Botwood, Corner Brook, and Red Bay and Goose Bay in Labrador. HMCS Chambly and HMCS Moose Jaw scored the NEF’s first U-boat kill in September 1941.

At the same time, the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) started constructing its air base near the community of Torbay, just outside St. John’s. These aircraft would protect St. John's and Bell Island (providing the iron ore to Cape Breton’s vital steel mills), as well as patrol the convoy routes east of Newfoundland. During the summer of 1941, Group Captain CM McEwen established Group 1 Headquarters at the Newfoundland Hotel in St. John’s alongside the Royal Canadian Navy (moving to the new joint RCN/RCAF Headquarters on Plymouth Road the following year). RCAF Air Station Torbay opened in October 1941 with two runways, and patrols commenced when four Hudson bombers from No. 2 (British) Squadron arrived from Nova Scotia the following month.

In February 1942, due to the dramatic increase in passenger traffic between Canada and Newfoundland (and congestion on the “Newfy Bullet,” as the Newfoundland Railway was facetiously known), the Commission of Government approved a regular Trans-Canada Airlines (TCA) service between the two dominions (TCA became Air Canada in 1965, and was privatized in 1988). The RCAF developed additional facilities at Gander and Goose Bay, and utilized the two American aerodromes on the Island. RCAF personnel also manned radar stations at Torbay, Cape Bauld (at the tip of the Great Northern Peninsula), Port-aux-Basques, and Spotted Island and Brig Harbour in Labrador. As well, the RCAF operated an experimental early warning system at Cape Ray on the southwest tip of Newfoundland, and took over the five US radar stations on the Island in 1944.

The Americans had arrived at St. John’s in January 1941 on board the United States Army Transport (USAT) Edmund B Alexander thanks to the (in)famous Anglo-American Leased Bases Agreement (signed March 17, 1941). They ultimately developed the Argentia Naval/Air Station, the Harmon Air Force Base, Goose Bay Air Base (jointly with Canada) and Fort Pepperell in St. Johns, plus dozens of radar/radio and artillery posts throughout the Colony.

The most stunning impact of all this military activity was economic. During the fall of 1943 (the peak year of construction) over 20,000 Newfoundlanders were directly employed in building the various facilities. Over the course of the war years, the United States invested $114,000,000 (USD) on their facilities in Newfoundland, and the Canadians $65,000,000 (CAD). Further, military personnel rose to upwards of 29,000 (13,000 US, 16,000 CA) in 1943, all of whom purchased local goods and services. This infusion of cash into the Newfoundland economy had a huge impact on the people of Newfoundland both directly and indirectly.

By 1939, the year the Second World War began, nearly 50,000 Newfoundlanders received some form of government assistance. Three years later, unemployment was virtually eliminated for the first time since the non-elected British-appointed Commission of Government replaced the Alderdice Government in 1934. Tens of thousands of Newfoundlanders worked not only on base construction but were also employed in their support and supply. While the Americans tended to provide for their bases through direct shipments from the US, the Canadians generally obtained their supplies and services from local sources. Whereas pre-war, only the merchant, professional, and political/bureaucratic elite of the Colony could afford a standard of living comparable to that of the United States and Canada, by 1942, most Newfoundland residents now tasted the benefits of the booming wartime economy.

Government revenues - mainly from Customs and Excise taxes - also rose considerably during the war years, from an expected $4,000,000 deficit in 1939 to a $7,000,000 surplus in the 1944-1945 fiscal year. By the end of the Second World War, the Newfoundland government had a cumulative budgetary surplus of some 29 million dollars ($400,000,000 current CAD). Government expenditures rose correspondingly, resulting in new investments in education (free and mandatory for those 14 years and under), infrastructure, healthcare, pensions for disabled veterans and their families, and even loans and gifts to Great Britain. During the 1943 fiscal year, the Newfoundland Government purchased 7500 quintals (100 units of weight, either kilograms or pounds) of salt fish from local suppliers and shipped it to the UK as a contribution to the mother country from the people of Newfoundland.

By war’s end, the Newfoundland Government inherited a tremendous amount of military property and infrastructure . In St. John’s, this included two hospitals, the RCN/RCAF Headquarters on Plymouth Road, the Naval Barracks complex at Buckmasters’ Field and on Blackhead, the Tactical Training Centre on the Southside, as well as numerous other properties within the city limits. RCAF Air Station Torbay eventually became what is now St. John’s International Airport, serving over one and a half million domestic and international passengers annually.

St. John’s Harbour was also transformed. Whereas, the waterfront was a tangle of decrepit wharves and finger-piers when they arrived, the RCN upgraded all the moorings along the Southside to naval standards (most times, also improving the owner’s property with paving, fencing, access, etc.) and constructed new facilities such as HMC Dockyard (now the Port of St. John’s Shipping Terminal) and the fuel tank farm, which was sold to Imperial Oil in 1946, and still overlooks St. John's Harbour.

Hospitals at Gander, Botwood, and Lewisporte were added to the health care system; a fourth, the US Memorial Hospital at St. Lawrence on the Burin Peninsula, was officially opened 6 June 1954 (the 10th Anniversary of D-Day) by the United States Government as a gift to the people of St. Lawrence and Lawn who rescued and cared for the survivors of the USS Pollux/USS Truxtun disaster, 18 February 1942.

Hundreds of miles of roads were laid during the war, and the Newfoundland Railway was enlarged with new rail lines and rolling stock. Further, modern communication systems were installed and/or augmented throughout the Island and in Labrador as navigational beacons were improved, and LORAN (Long Range Aid to Navigation) added. This list lengthened continually over the next few decades as the Americans (and to some degree the Canadians) closed their various facilities at St. John’s, Argentia, Botwood, Lewisporte, Gander, Stephenville, and Goose Bay, passing title to federal, provincial, and/or municipal governments.

The social impact of this “friendly invasion” was also substantial. With the arrival of thousands of young men in communities throughout Newfoundland, many away from home for the first time, social interaction between the genders was inevitable. The young women of Newfoundland were very impressed with the health and apparent wealth of the thousands of young men who flooded their local streets and venues. Marriages and pregnancies (and incidents of venereal disease) increased dramatically during the first few years, to the point that US authorities - fearing that Newfoundland women were only interested in snaring an American husband with all his fringe benefits - prohibited local marriage, even condemning some love-struck young men to prison terms for doing so.

Canadian authorities, while not encouraging such unions, did not prohibit them (and certainly did not jail their young men) and seldom did a week go by that the St. John’s Evening Telegram failed to announce an engagement or marriage between “a local girl” and a visiting serviceman. At war’s end, many local women (and men, as there was also a substantial women’s forces presence in Newfoundland during the war) joined their spouse in Canada or the United States. On the other hand, numerous Canadians stayed in Newfoundland and raised families. One can argue that these familial connections within the community eased Newfoundland’s integration into the Canadian federation in 1949.

The Second World War military presence had profound political ramifications for the Colony of Newfoundland. When the country relinquished democratic rule for Commission of Government in 1934, it was on the premise that political corruption and incompetence were the root causes of Newfoundland’s near bankrupt finances. The 1933 Newfoundland Royal Commission Report proposed, rather paternalisticaly, that Newfoundlanders needed “a rest from politics” for a few years. Thus, the somewhat vague promise was made to return responsible government when the Colony was once again on its financial feet.

Unfortunately, the Amulree Report’s (named after William Warrender Mackenzie, 1st Baron Amulree who headed the Royal Commission) supposition as to the causes of Newfoundland’s woes (the general moral failure and ignorance of Newfoundlanders) was seriously flawed. The real reason was the collapse of the fishing industry due to the Great Depression (not to mention the “Great Big Sea” of 1929), and the Colony’s dependence on a resource-based economy. This led to a dramatic drop in Government revenues at the same time that demand for poor relief increased exponentially. Consequently, many of the Commission of Government’s social engineering experiments over the next five years failed miserably. As a result, the Commission was left, as were previous Newfoundland governments, with courting foreign capital - usually at the expense of local workers and their families (the St. Lawrence fluorspar mines, for example). Ultimately, the solution to “The Problem of Newfoundland” was the start of the Second World War and the arrival of the Canadian and American military forces.

As previously noted, Newfoundlanders were promised (albeit imprecisely) that elected government would return once the Colony was able to manage by itself. By mid-war, with government surpluses in the millions of dollars, cries for London to make good on its vow became more strident. In response, British Deputy Prime Minister and Dominions’ Secretary Clement Attlee arrived at St. John’s in September 1942 on a fact-finding tour. He learned that while people wanted a return to self-government, they were not quite sure of what form it should take. A further parliamentary mission comprised of three British MPs followed in June 1943. The parliamentarians noted that while people did not want a return to the overtly partisan politics of 1932, Newfoundlanders were not keen on union with Canada, either.

With the end of the war, and a new Labour government under Clement Attlee in Whitehall, the question of Newfoundland’s political future became unavoidable. The answer was a National Convention of elected delegates to decide what form(s) of government was presented to Newfoundlanders in a national referendum. By this time, fearful of American entrenchment, Ottawa worried that if it did not entice Newfoundlanders to join Confederation, Canada could end up with an American protectorate at its doorstep - a bookend for Alaska. While the Canadian government could not blatantly interfere in the process, that did not stop Ottawa from making resources available to pro-Confederate champion (former broadcaster and failed pig farmer) Joseph R Smallwood.

The Attlee government also favoured Confederation (Britain ended the Second World War a financial cripple and didn't want the responsibility) and made sure that this option appeared on the final referendum ballot even though the National Convention rejected it. Most delegates favoured the return to responsible government before all else. Ultimately, the Confederate side won by a narrow margin after a very divisive campaign, and in December 1948, the victorious Smallwood, along with Canadian Prime Minister Louis St. Laurent, signed the Terms of Union of Newfoundland with Canada in Ottawa. Newfoundland became the tenth province of Canada at 11:59 PM, 31 March 1949 (the timing was most important as Smallwood did not want this solemn event to occur on April Fools’ Day!).

Ultimately, Prime Minister Sir Robert Bond’s prediction came true, although it was sixty years after he made it and concerned war rather than commerce. But it nevertheless had the same impact on Newfoundland and its people. When the Second World War erupted in September 1939, Newfoundland was bankrupt and helpless. Five years later, it was prosperous and well defended. Further, Newfoundland was no longer the poor relative of the British Commonwealth but rather the object of a tug-of-war between Canada and the United States. Whereas pre-war, Canada considered the Colony nothing but a nuisance and liability, and Newfoundlanders looked at their western neighbour as the vociferous “Canadian Wolf,” ten years later both antagonists merged into an improbable union.

This would have been considered absolutely impossible in the 1930s. But the militarization of Newfoundland precipitated tremendous economic and social changes, and transformed Newfoundland’s future. The military activity completely reversed the financial disasters that led to the loss of Responsible Government in 1934. Further, this and the infusion of thousands of young, healthy Canadian and American servicemen, introduced a standard of living to the people of Newfoundland that had been heretofore only available to the merchant, government, and professional elite of the Colony. Having had a taste of “the good life,” so to speak, Newfoundlanders were not willing to return to the Dirty Thirties after the war with its poverty, class inequities, and social barriers. When offered the chance to join the Canadian confederation - with its post-war social safety net - the majority of Newfoundlanders decided to take it (although St. John’s, not surprisingly, was decidedly anti-Confederate).

The campaign was heated, divisive, and religious, and pitted community against community, family against family, and might have erupted into sectarian violence at an earlier time. But Canada was no longer seen - at least by 52% of the population - as the interfering, land-grabbing, resource-stealing interloper of the past. Nevertheless, seventy years later, many Newfoundlanders still feel antipathy towards our union with Canada, especially considering our newfound offshore oil wealth, and habitually strained relationship with Ottawa. Proponents suggest that Canada, to the detriment of Newfoundland, has been the main beneficiary of what they argue was actually a shotgun wedding arranged between London and Ottawa.

Be that as it may, during the Second World War, Newfoundlanders lived (and died) alongside Canadians – in Europe and at home - and many married Newfoundland based military personnel. The connection between the two neighbours during this period was as much shared experience as commercial or strategic, and this ultimately led to Newfoundland’s seamless transition to Canada’s tenth province in 1949. This being the case, had Newfoundland not transformed into The Gibraltar of America during the Second World War, the erstwhile dominion’s fortunes (not to mention Canada’s) could have turned out quite differently. In October 2015, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador officially designated the militarization of Newfoundland during the Second World War as An Event of Provincial Historic Significance.