The Remains of the Day is James Ivory’s 1993 film adaptation of Kazuo Ishiguro’s novel with the same title. It narrates the story of Mr. Stevens, a butler who takes a trip to the coast in 1958 in order to find a housekeeper they used to work together before the Second World War. During his trip, he recalls scenes from the Darlington Hall, the mansion where he was the butler. From his collaboration with other members of the crew, the co-existence at work with his father and the relationships between him and miss Kenton.

The Remains of the Day is a film where action takes place in the shadows. Anthony Hopkins and Emma Thompson are outstanding in their roles. Especially, Anthony Hopkins will not reveal his emotions to anyone. He is always distant and does not have close relationships with anyone, including his father. Actually, Mr. Stevens behaves exactly as his father, an old man who believes in tradition and manners. A man who stayed at work till his death. And his son does not abandon his post to go after his father. While on an important dinner, he stays at the dinner room, although they have informed him that his father is dying.

Contrary to Anthony Hopkins, Emma Thompson is Miss Kenton, a housekeeper who provides excellent services but also seeks for interpersonal relationships. She wants to learn the books Mr. Stevens reads and can’t hide her surprise when she finds out he reads romantic novels. She wants to help the younger members of the crew and opposes Mr. Stevens who does not help them. And finally, she leaves Darlington Hall when things become bleak, not only between her and Mr. Stevens, but also with the decisions that Lord Darlington takes.

Kazuo Ishiguro’s novel was not easy for adaptation. It takes mostly part into Mr. Stevens’ thoughts. However, the writer Ruth Prawer Jhabvala manages to bring into script Mr. Stevens’ inner world. The temptation for a whole different movie were there. Lord Darlington is an important figure in English politics. He tries to create a peace agreement between Britain and Nazi Germany. Many writers would emphasize on this plot. However, Jhabvala remains faithful to Ishiguro’s novel, turning Darlington’s story into a subplot. The main story is Mr. Stevens, his thoughts and (lack of) actions. Mr. Stevens watches all the important matters that take place in Darlington Hall, but does not express his opinions. Even when they explicitly ask him to say what he thinks. His role as a butler is to serve. While serving others, he forgot to serve himself the joy of life.

The Remains of the Day is a slowburn film. Many have accused this film as boring and without action. But this is the magic of this film. The evolution of the characters, their growth, their vision, their thoughts. While the world turns around them, they have their inner problems. Maybe small to some, but great for all of us who can understand them.