To win an award in a photo competition that had entries from 50 countries is not a small achievement. Saurabh Kumar from Hyderabad made it to the second place in the worldwide competition organised by Fondation Alliance Francaise, Paris. This entry will also be exhibited in Hyderabad as a part of the Indian Photography Festival 2016 starting this Thursday.

“It was about capturing sport on camera and the theme needed to also convey tolerance, openness, social inclusion and team cohesion. This award winning picture was shot by ‘panning the camera’ and I had to be in the sun for four hours. It a shot from the ‘Wari pilgrimage yatra’ at Pandharpur in Maharashtra.

Since I wanted a good shot, I had to go early and get a front place in the vast crowd. I could not even budge from the place for a minute, lest I lose my front place. I was always interested in photography and coming from a middle class family made me buy my first ‘point to shoot film camera’ by earnings from giving tuitions,” says Saurabh, who pursued a photography course at Osmania University after he came to the city in the year 2009.

Saurabh Kumar has been constantly working on enhancing his knowledge in the field by attending workshops. “I did a workshop with Barbara Bechloff which took me to the women fishing community of Kasimedu in Tamil Nadu. Few months back, a photo tour was organised in Mahbubnagar district of Telangana to bring into focus women farmers and their quest for financial freedom. Any individual can support this ‘Matti Manushulu’ (People of the Soil) program by acquiring pictures. Many times there are disappointing moments. I see a picture before my eyes and before I lift the camera or click, ‘that moment’ is gone. Once I was seeing a sunset and a child came running across the mountains. I did not have the camera with me! It was sheer disappointment. It’s about getting the right story in your frame at the right time,” says Saurabh.

What does Saurabh say on the ever changing modern equipment? “A lot of new equipment comes in the market. But I sincerely feel that there is no need to always buy a new product. It’s more important to know how best to use the equipment that one already owns,” adds Saurabh, who also has a fascination for old heritage structures in Hyderabad.