Mr.M.Veda Kumar

Date of Birth : 5th August, 1952 Place of Birth : Hyderabad, A.P., India Educational Qualifications : Bachelor in Engineering (Civil) Diploma in Applied Landscape Design Course on Architectural Documentation and Heritage Course on Intelligent Architecture

Activities

Since twenty five years, he has associated himself with the renowned Art Film Maker Mr. B. Narsing Rao in various capacities in making outstanding films like Maa Bhoomi and Rangula Kala. He was the Executive Producer of The City (Hyderabad) Maa Vooru (The Village), Akruti (The Shape), Dasi (Bonded women) and Matti Manushulu (Men of clay) which won him National Awards. He was an official delegate to various children and adult International Film Festivals held in India and abroad.

To cater to both literary and cultural activities experts are called to conduct workshops and accord short term training for both the students and teachers. He further organized many a symposiums and seminars, which thereupon resulted in his editing a Children’s publication viz Bala Chelimi a children’s magazine with new perspective.

Feeling the need to start Children’s Film Movement in the State of A.P. He has organized Seven Children’s Film Festivals at Hyderabad in the name of Hyderabad Children’s Film Festivals and 1st Asian Children’s Film Festival in Year 2002 which is the first of its kind. This festival has received enthusiastic response from film makers, producers and various organizations from Asia.

He had a whirl wind tour of all the Districts of A.P., and interacted with the children by screening the films for them and instilled enthusiasm among the societies formed by him.

Because of the relentless efforts City of Hyderabad became a permanent venue for the prestigious biennial event viz. International Children’s Film Festival of Hyderabad since 1995.

He played a key role to introduce Open Forum. It is a platform where eminent Directors, Producers, Technicians and film critics and others who are connected with the film making with International status are facilitated to interact with the child and other delegates. All the Open Forums have been chaired by him during the film festivals.

He has designed and organized several workshops for children and teachers such as Film Appreciation Programme, Film Making, Photography, Script Writing, Animation, Puppetry and Dramatic Presentation etc. during all the festivals.

His dream to facilitate the Indian Children to watch films critically and appreciate a good cinema, took a practical shape when he founded a National Level Organization, called “FEDERATION OF CHILDREN’S FILM SOCIEITIES OF INDIA” in the year 2000 by making Hyderabad as its head quarters.

He organized 1st ASIAN CHILDREN’S FILM FESTIVAL in Nov-2002. His efforts procured 180 films from India and Asian countries as entries at the festival which received accolade by prominent film personalities and organizations.

As he has been involved sincerely to bring momentum in children’s films in Asia. He was invited as a resource speaker on children’s film making in Asia at ASIAN FILM FORUM MANILA 2003 at Manila, Philippines in Jan 2003. Where he formed Asian children’s film forum with like minded film makers and eminent persons from different countries. It stands as a platform where the members from Asia to share their views about film making and film movement in Asia.

Andhra Pradesh State Film Television and Theatre Development Corporation Ltd. has appointed him as a member of the Children Film Script Selection Committee for the purpose of scrutiny and examination of the scripts received from the producers of the children films for approval by the committee.

He has also been selected by the Government of Andhra Pradesh as one of the committee members for the A.P. State Nandi Television Film Awards 2002.

His thirst towards Folklore was abundantly, evidenced when NAKASI FOLK PAINTING & TOYS WORKSHOP, MADHUBANI PAINTING and WOODEN STRING PUPPETRY WORKSHOPS, SINGING and ODESSY DANCE WORKSHOPS were organized for school children and teachers.

To fulfill his social commitment, he established Educational Academy in 1981. The academy stemmed in & started Oxford Grammar School, a new branch called Creative Child Centre to blend-in-the diversified tastes of the Children into a common urge for refinement and remodeling.

As a convener to Heritage cell of Forum For A Better Hyderabad, he is striving to bring world heritage city status to Hyderabad. by protecting precincts, rock formation, monuments and vernacular architecture.

Being one of the Founder Trustee of FACT (Foundation for Art, Cultural Heritage and Tradition he has done extensive research about the historical monuments of Andhra Pradesh.

He also a Member of Core Committee of INTACH, Hyderabad AP Chapter tying to bring awareness about conservation and protection of Heritage buildings.

Since 13 years he has been associated with environmentalists. He motivated the children and adults to develop concern towards environment. He involved the children in the distribution of saplings and plantation since 6 years. He brought awareness about water conservation and its importance by having the Rain Water Harvesting pits and gave practical knowledge to the children to make them to implement it at their respective places. Similarly he is educating the citizens of twin cities about air pollution, water pollution and discouraging plastic bags.

As he has more concern towards nature, he developed a nature park for children “BALARANYA” which is the treasure of information both for educationists and environmentalists. Here water pumped by wind-mill, one of the natural methods of generating energy. Solar light, Solar cooking, Biogas and organic farming Vermi Compost are being utilized here for different purposes. Nature camps and lectures for school children are conducted in Balaranya.

Schooling & College

M. Veda Kumar had his early schooling at his native village Pregnapur of Medak district in Andhra Pradesh, India.

During his Civil Engineering at Manipal, was the one of the founder of Sanskritika Samithi, a cultural organization, which brought together the telugu speaking people on to a common literary and cultural platform.

His cultural upsurge found a vent in Manipal. He organized drama competitions and screenings of films. Himself being a member of Photography Club of Manipal, he worked hard and Won a 2nd prize in a competition called “Manipal by Camera”.

From the rank of LANCE CORPORAL he became a senior under officer in N.C.C. and won many a accolades and finally, was the Sole In charge of 5 Karnataka Engineering Coy.

As a Leo International Club member of Manipal, he organized many Rural Camps on health in South Kanara District, Karnataka. He got 230 Eye Donations and won the jersey prize

Career

As a full fledged B.E. (Civil) of 1977, he joined as an Junior Engineer, Roads and Building Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, India in the year 1978 July