On May 8 2006, Warner Bros. announced that Madonna would be releasing her Jonas Åkerlund-directed documentary I’m Going to Tell You a Secret as a DVD/CD package on June 20.

“It’s sort of a circle around three families: the family of the people I work with, the family that I live with, and the family of man, the world that I live in.”

“It’s about the trials and tribulations of putting a show together, the struggle to balance my life as an entertainer with my life as a mother, and it’s also about the world, my politics, my belief systems, my philosophy, about where I feel my place in the world is.”

On August 29 2004, Madonna played to over 62,000 fans at Ireland’s Slane Castle during the only open-air performance of The Re-Invention Tour.

A fan who attended the show shared their review with Madonna fan-site Mad-Eyes.net:

“I can’t believe I’ve finally come to Ireland. Jesus Christ, what took me so fucking long!” Yesterday evening Madonna gave her first open air concert in 11 years. And Madonna didn’t disappoint. Even though it rained and she had to cover herself with a jumper sometimes, she put on a magnificent show. During the first part of the show, she wore the golden corset again. Later, while spinning during Papa Don’t Preach, she said “I’m just trying to keep myself warm!” while wearing an “Irish Do It Better” shirt. The crowd was certainly warmed up and gave her a lot of energy. When it was raining during Nothing Fails, a crew member sat on his knees on stage, covering Madonna under an umbrella while she was playing the guitar. Madonna laughed and sang “rain, rain, go away”. Because of the open air, the catwalk was present all the time and even much lower than usual, giving Madonna the chance to skim hands of the fans. The confetti for Holiday was blown into the air. As the message “Re-Invent Yourself” appeared on screen, Madonna thanked the crowd “thank you goodnight” and added “Ireland you’re the best!” Afterwards, huge fireworks broke out over the place.

Madonna herself recalled the performance in her tour documentary I’m Going To Tell You A Secret, although her recollection of the show’s attendance appeared to be slightly hazy. Billboard magazine reported ticket sales of 62,275 for the event rather than the 80,000 people capacity of the grounds.

(Thanks to Madonnalicious & their readers for the pics and to Mad-Eyes.net!)

On May 11 2006, Madonna.com revealed the CD track list for I’m Going To Tell You A Secret.

On June 20th, Madonna’s documentary film, I’m Going To Tell You A Secret, becomes available for you to take home. This very special DVD/CD set includes the full documentary, plus never-before-seen footage. Additionally, a 14 track CD, featuring rare & live versions of songs from the documentary, is available exclusively in this set.

CD Track List: 01. The Beast Within 02. Vogue 03. Nobody Knows Me 04. American Life 05. Hollywood (Remix) 06. Die Another Day 07. Lament 08. Like A Prayer 09. Imagine 10. Mother and Father 11. Susan McLeod/Into The Groove 12. Music 13. Holiday 14. I Love New York