Graham Fenton returns to the Midlands on Saturday 23 years after his greatest day in football as a 19 year old.

Ron Atkinson employed him as a secret weapon to take out the mighty Manchester United, and worked a treat as Villa stormed to a 3-1 victory at Wembley Stadium in the League Cup final.

Fenton had the world at his feet, and was tipped by many to become a future England international.

But he failed to fulfil the potential that many thought he had, and faces a lesser Midlands club on Saturday inside the dugout.

He is currently joint manager of South Shields, who face Coleshill Town on Saturday in the FA Vase semi-final with a place at Wembley at stake.

But what happened to the man that was once Villa’s great hope, and how has he ended up one tie away from a trip to the national stadium for the second time in three years?

Fenton started his career at the famous Wallsend Boys Club, which has nurtured many England internationals including Michael Carrick and Alan Shearer.

It was then he secured a move to Aston Villa and shone at West Bromwich Albion on loan, but was recalled after just a month.

He would play a pivotal role in that League Cup final and on the road to Wembley, but never really progressed at Aston Villa, and in turn was sold to Blackburn Rovers.

But if he thought chances were limited at Aston Villa, trying to break into a strike force that included Alan Shearer and Chris Sutton proved tougher.

From here his career derailed, and he admitted he ‘fell out of love for the game’, despite winning the League Cup again in 2000 with Leicester City.

Short spells at Stoke City, St Mirren, Walsall and Blackpool followed, but it wasn’t until 2003 when joining Blyth Spartans that he was back happy playing football.

He would play and then assistant manage the Spartans, before moving to North Shields again as assistant manager.

He had to wait until 2012 to get into management, taking over the Tyne & Wear club.

He managed the side to promotion in 2014, and would win the club’s first FA Vase in 2015, beating Glossop North End in the final.

But Fenton at the start of this season made the unenviable move across town to local rivals South Shields in search of further success.

Controversy has marred South Shields cup run so far, when they looked set to be eliminated in round four.

They were 4-2 down and had former Sunderland man Julio Arca sent off until the floodlights blew and the match had to be abandoned.

The FA forced a replay which left opponents Morpeth Town very unhappy, and their mood didn’t improve when beaten 4-0 in the replay on the following Tuesday.

Since then it has been plain sailing for Fenton’s men, but on Saturday face a red hot Coleshill Town who will be gunning for the odds on favourites to lift the trophy.

Coleshill Town, who play at Pack Meadow, were on a 13 match winning run until falling to Shawbury United on Saturday, so no doubt will be confident of pulling off an upset.

But as for Fenton, he could be well on his way to Wembley for the third time, and it’d be a brave man to back against his side going all the way.