South Shields co-manager Graham Fenton says the adventure for a non-league side reaching the Buildbase FA Vase Final at Wembley is “vital” for the grassroots game.

Former Aston Villa and Leicester midfielder Fenton was manager of North Shields until earlier this year, before resigning to take over at neighbours and fellow Northern League Division One outfit South.

South Shields, who are bookies’ favourites for the trophy, face current Vase holders Morpeth Town in a mouth-watering fourth round clash at Mariners Park on Saturday.

South Shields v Morpeth Town

Buildbase FA Vase

Fourth Round

3pm, Saturday 7 January

Mariners Park

Fenton tasted FA Vase glory with North Shields in 2015, while fellow co-manager Lee Picton won the trophy twice as a Whitley Bay player.

“I have great memories from that day,” said Fenton. “I think Lee and I will share some of those memories with the lads to try and instil an extra bit of hunger in there.

“But to be honest I don’t think they’ll need it, they know the prize at stake and everything will be up for the game on Saturday.

“It’s vital The Final is kept at Wembley, it’s such a vital experience for non-league footballers, when else are they going to get a chance to play there?

“It’s a lot better if you can lift the trophy, but even if you don’t, it’s a fantastic day out that you’ll take to your grave.”

There is not much between the sides – South Shields are second with 65 points from 27 games, just five points behind leaders North Shields with a game in hand.

Morpeth are fourth, nine points adrift of the Mariners, having played three games less.

But Picton insists there is a score to settle from last season, after Morpeth knocked out South Shields on penalties en route to FA Vase glory.

“A number of players in our squad are relishing the opportunity to return the favour,” added Picton.

“There’s no harm in having past failures help motivate you overcome another hurdle. Sporting history is littered with those cases – hopefully that will be the case for us on Saturday.

“We’re banking on another bumper crowd at Mariners Park, and we’re hoping to have something around the 2,000 mark, which would be incredible.

“Hopefully that home support and the extra motivation from players in our camp will see us finishing the right side of the line.

“A lot of fans are dreaming of Wembley, which is great. We want everybody involved to dream about it, but we must appreciate we’ve got no God-given right to get there.”

FA Vase history

South Shields have never won The FA Vase, and will be itching to set the record straight after Morpeth knocked them out on penalties last season. The furthest the Mariners have ever gone in the competition was in 1975-76, when they were knocked out in the quarter finals by Friar Lane Old Boys.

Morpeth defeated Hereford 4-1 in May to claim their maiden FA Vase crown. They are third favourites to take the trophy, but their opponents are back as favourites for the trophy.

One to Watch

South Shields have former Sunderland and Middlesbrough midfielder Julio Arca on their books. The Argentine initially retired in 2013 after his stint on the Riverside, but joined the Mariners in September 2015.

Did You Know?

Graham Fenton has a League Cup winners' medal - he was part of the Aston Villa squad who, under manager Ron Atkinson, lifted the trophy in 1994 after beating Sir Alex Ferguson's formidable Manchester United team.

The prize?

A place in the fifth round, and a cheque for £1,875, awaits the winner.

The Final of the Buildbase FA Vase forms part of Non-League Finals Day, which takes place at Wembley Stadium on Sunday 21 May.