GOOD MORNING: “We thought it might have some legs(!). But, we didn’t make any money — as a matter of fact, we lost money.” “It” was Playboy’s video, “O.J. Simpson’s Minimum Maintenance Workout” ($14.95, 68 min.), which was bought by Shep Alster’s All Works Entertainment of Fort Lauderdale, Fla. They renamed it “O.J.’s Workout” and Alster added outtakes to the tape — which was subpoenaed by the prosecution. “I told them about the outtakes — and there it was — O.J. talking about hitting a woman (“the wife”). That’s why I was surprised the defense introduced it. They knew what was on the tape,” Alster said. And Tuesday , the original tape plus outtakes were screened for the courtroom and the world on every station covering the trial. Ironically, “Playboy didn’t want to be attached to the project,” said Alster, “so we bought it and haven’t done much with it either. The initial response was lukewarm — there was already so much O.J. product out there. Bookstores didn’t even want to carry it. We have no more plans for it.” I called Tower Video to check availability of the tape and was told, “We don’t have it — they pulled it.”… The “O.J. generation” continues: KCOP’s “O.J. Tonight” nightly trial highlight anchor Wendy Walsh caught film and TV makers’ attention — she has played herself in “The Mask,” “The Heat” and “Independence Day.” Next, United Par’s “Live Shot” sets her as another reporter … O.J. attorney Robert Shapiro, no stranger to L.A. nightlife, turns the tables on Larry King as Shapiro joins King roasters Sept. 16 at the fundraiser for Dream Street Foundation for terminally ill kids … And Kato Kaelin continues his presence on the showbiz scene. He was one of those helping Corey Feldman toast his birthday at the Derby, where Feldman also celebrated shedding his old, unsavory skin — by burning his former, wildly colored wardrobe. Corey then completed a show with his band — in basic black.

Popular on Variety

“I’M IN ABSOLUTE SHOCK,” Jane Seymour told me on her return from N.Y. where one of her watercolors (she has been watercoloring since college) was auctioned for $ 25,000 to benefit the Make a Wish Foundation. Her painting also will front new Discover celeb-painted credit cards. Seymour, on hand at the Guggenheim Museum with husband James Keach and her three children, earlier was told her painting might fetch $5,000 — to send one terminally ill child to a favorite place. Now that five children can make a wish, Seymour is understandably pleased. She’s is in her fourth month of twin expectancy and has filmed seven segs for next season’s “Dr. Quinn,” and will do a few more while awaiting the births — she’s conveniently expecting in the series as well … Jonathan Winters and Bill Davis have written a screenplay, “The Home,” that Winters describes as “a black comedy, not cruel, set in a place like the Motion Picture Country House — with all fun people, not like ‘Cocoon.’ ” He says the project’s being developed for a feature by Cass Warner, granddaughter of Harry Warner. Winters, who will be 70 on Nov. 11, also is completing a book, “The Lives and Loves of Maud Frickert”– to be illustrated (by Jonathan), of course … Robert Redford, a member of the Natural Resources Defense Council’s board of trustees, speaks Thursday in D.C. to alert the public about a threat from Congress regarding national parks and public lands the new leadership is threatening to sell, lease or give away. The NRDC releases a report Thursday documenting Congressional proposals.