Soldiers and others who served in Afghanistan as part of Operation Slipper have been officially welcomed home in parades across the country.

Loading...

The parades marked the end of the operation, which was Australia's contribution to the conflict in Afghanistan, launched in response to the deadly September 11 terrorist attacks in the United States.

Operation Slipper began in 2001 and involved more than 33,000 members of the Defence Force, public service and Federal Police who were deployed to Afghanistan and the Middle East.

During the mission, 41 ADF personnel were killed and another 261 wounded.

Parades were held in state and territory capital cities and in Townsville.

A memorial service was also held at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra.

Loading...

Speaking at the ceremony in Canberra, Prime Minister Tony Abbott praised the efforts of all those involved in Operation Slipper.

"On this national day of commemoration we honour all who served in Afghanistan as part of Australia's longest war. Our armed forces personnel, our police, and our civilians," he said.

"That war ended not with victory, and not with defeat, but with hope, hope for a better Afghanistan, and for a safer world."

Opposition Leader Bill Shorten also paid tribute, promising to remember those who lost their lives.

"We pledge our support to the wounded and to all those who have come back to Australia forever changed by what they experienced. We pay tribute to your families who have known the long, lonely anxiety of a loved one in harm's way."

Major General Peter Warwick Gilmore led the first contingent of Australian Special Forces troops into Afghanistan in 2001.

Speaking at the Sydney event, he said "we really didn't know what we were going in to".

"I still remember the first night we flew in, there were five of us flying into a dusty airstrip south of Afghanistan," he said.

"I don't think we knew then what lay ahead in the next 13 years, let alone in the next couple of days."

He said he was proud of the valour, courage and tenacity shown by Australians who "were given a job in Afghanistan".

"I think that every soldier, officer, sailor, every air man and woman who went across there did their job magnificently. It was a tough job. It started with a counter-terrorist mission, there is no doubt in Afghanistan where we were, we made a difference."

But while proud of Australia's achievements, Major General Gilmore also grieves for his comrades that did not come home.

"The faces that are etched in my memory of those that I served with that have been killed, that aren't here today ... those faces remain with us," he said. "I think of them many days."

Impact on families and loved ones also acknowledged

More than 2,000 personnel took part in Canberra's Operation Slipper parade, including Captain Tim Glover who marched as part of the Royal Australian Army's Infantry Corp.

Captain Glover completed two tours of Afghanistan, as well as two tours of East Timor and a tour of Iraq.

His wife, Kimberly Glover, and their 11-month-old daughter Ayla, joined the crowd in a show of support.

"It's good for the families as well," Captain Glover said. "They're the ones who have also served."

Also in Canberra was mother-of-three Nicole Young who drove all the way from Wagga for the parade with her sons Jake, Lachlan and Brayden, all under the age of five.

"My husband is a sergeant in the Air Force. He's done two deployments of Afghanistan, so that's why I'm here," Ms Young said.

Ms Young said the parade was well-earned recognition for all the good Australian troops had done in Afghanistan, and also for what their families had done for their partners at home during that time.

In Melbourne, about 1,400 veterans marched ahead of a ceremony held at the Shrine of Remembrance.

Squadron Leader Jim Veino said it was a way to thank those who risked their lives in service to the nation.

"It absolutely is that and it's also to thank the families and help the families along because they're sending their husbands, and fathers and mothers and kids over to these operations where they can be quite dangerous," he said.

Captain Adrian Miller said it was important for the public to show their support.

"Australian society saw when veterans returned from the Vietnam War they weren't necessarily shown the respect they deserved for their services, so these sort of parades and this sort of commemorative service is really a way of making sure those mistakes are not repeated," he said.

About 4,000 veterans of Operation Slipper also marched through Brisbane where the streets were lined with thousands of people who clapped and cheered them as they passed.

Sergeant Andrew Duggan from 7th Combat Signal Regiment said he appreciated the gratitude shown by onlookers.

Sergeant Duggan served twice overseas, in 2005 in Kuwait and then in the Middle East in 2010.

"As the years have gone on we've had more and more public support," he said.

"Coming back and actually finding that people appreciate what I did over there, it's a very good feeling.

"I believe we've made a difference over there, and after all, that's all that matters."

Squadron Leader Belinda Johnson served in the Middle East from 2006 to 2007 and said the parade reminded her that she was proud of what she and her comrades had achieved overseas.

"I think it's a really bittersweet moment for us," she said. "I think everybody will think about their experiences over there, the good and the difficult as well."

Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said people should never forget the sacrifices made by defence personnel.

"I especially want to acknowledge the families with us today, who pay the ultimate sacrifice with the loss of a loved one, killed in action during Operation Slipper," she said.

Tasmanians also turned out to remember 1,300 Defence Force personnel who served in Operation Slipper, including two who lost their lives — Corporal Richard Atkinson from Hobart and Corporal Cameron Baird from Burnie.

The parade in Hobart started at the soldiers' memorial on the Domain and finished at the Cenotaph where a service was held thanking all those who took part.

Loading