Operation Slipper was the name given to the Australian Defence Force (ADF) contribution to the war in Afghanistan from 2001 to 2014. It involved two major activities: combat operations in Afghanistan and maritime security operations in the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean.

Australia joined the war in Afghanistan in November 2001, following the September 11 attacks in the United States. Australian Special Air Service Regiment (SASR) troops were among the first coalition forces to enter Afghanistan, conducting reconnaissance and combat missions against the Taliban and al-Qaeda. They were supported by C-130 Hercules aircraft and F/A-18 Hornets contributed to air defence at the American Indian Ocean base of Diego Garcia. .

In 2005, Australia expanded its involvement in Afghanistan by deploying a reconstruction task force (RTF) to Uruzgan province, where the ADF worked with Dutch forces to provide security and development assistance to the local population. Australia’s mission built schools, health centres, roads and other critical infrastructure in Uruzgan and nearby provinces, giving hope and opportunity to a region that had been devastated by warfare.

The RTF was later replaced by a mentoring and reconstruction task force (MRTF) and then a mentoring task force (MTF), which trained and partnered with the Afghan National Army and police.

Limited Edition Print of 'Operation Slipper - In Service Against Terrorism' by Barry Spicer. Discover more here.

Australia also contributed to the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) headquarters, the Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Uruzgan, the Special Operations Task Group (SOTG), which conducted counter-insurgency and counter-terrorism operations, and various other roles such as medical, engineering, logistics, intelligence and aviation support.

Cameron Baird joined the Australian Regular Army in January 2000 and served in East Timor, Iraq, and Afghanistan. He was awarded with the Medal of Gallantry for his second operational tour in Afghanistan and was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross for his bravery in the Ghawchak, Uruzgan province battle. His friends and family pledged to endure his legacy and emulate his passion for soldier welfare through Cam's Cause. Read more on: Cameron Baird: A Hero's Legacy

Operation Slipper was Australia’s longest war, lasting for 13 years. It was also one of its most costly, both in human and financial terms. 41 Australian soldiers were killed and 261 wounded during the operation. The war also had a significant impact on the mental health of many veterans and their families.

Operation Slipper ended on 31 December 2014, when Australia formally concluded its combat operations in Afghanistan.

On 21 March 2015, Welcome Home parades were held in every capital city and Townsville to commemorate the end of Operation Slipper. The Op Slipper commemorative range, endorsed by then Chief of Defence Force, remembers the end of Australia's longest military operation.

Military Shop is an official licensee of the ADF and donate part of their profits to veteran charities. Explore the Afghanistan commemorative collection here.

Australia did continued to provide training and advisory support to the Afghan security forces under a new operation name: Operation Highroad which ended in June 2021 when the last ADF personnel withdrew.

(The United States Armed Forces completed their withdrawal from Afghanistan on 30 August 2021, marking the end of the 2001–2021 war)