Only 30 years old, Isabella Leong (梁洛施) always gave the impression that she is older than she is due to her life experiences. In a recent interview, the actress shared the hardship of being a single mom of three. Regardless of suffering in her childhood and failed relationship with billionaire Richard Li (李澤楷), she still believes in real love.

Isabella entered the industry at the age of 12 as a model for Emperor Entertainment Group. At the age of 16, she released her own music album. At the age of 19, she met Hong Kong businessman Li Ka Shing‘s (李嘉誠) son, Richard Li. Though the pair stayed together for four years and Isabella gave birth to three sons, she never married into the wealthy family. The couple eventually separated in 2011.

Still Believes in Love

In an interview with Kevin Tsai (蔡康永) on his show, U Can U BiBi <奇葩說5>, Isabella shared her perspective on love and said she never regretted having Richard’s children before marriage. Isabella said, “I believe that when you love someone, you have to love them at the fullest!”

When the host discussed the topic of infidelity, another guest stated that they could tolerate it, while Isabella immediately answered, “You don’t need this kind of man!” Though she said it as a joke, it is evident that Isabella believes in a trustworthy and honest relationship.

Could her single parenting views be influenced by her own childhood? Her father, Luis Nolasco da Silva, died of drug overdose when she was only six months old, which left her and her mother to fend for themselves. Since her father’s prestigious family did not accept her and her mother, Isabella could only depend on her mother and her older half sister. Eventually, she even took on her mother’s surname.

From a very young age, Isabella became very independent and assisted with family living expenses. She and her mother were kicked out by the landlord when they did not have enough money for rent. From her tough childhood experiences, Isabella has always been more mature than her real age.

Makes Film Comeback

Although Isabella disappeared from the public eye in recent years, she continues to love acting and agreed to film Pang Ho Cheung‘s (彭浩翔) new comedy, Miss Misbehavior <恭喜八婆>, in which she plays a boss from hell. Filming for the movie has started and it won’t be long before viewers can see Isabella on the big screen once again.

Sources: HK01 [1,2]