6 July – Despite having three sons with Hong Kong billionaire Richard Li, their age gap proved to be an obstacle in their relationship, with Isabella Leong citing that she missed her old life as being a mother bored her, and Isabella has already been spotted with her new, possibly younger boyfriend in France.

The couple were seen by the tourists in Louvre Musuem, Paris in March this year, and in a photo uploaded by netizens, Isabella was seen wearing a blue dress shopping in a trendy shoe shop, accompanied by a handsome man.

Apart from that, she was also seen at several tourist attractions in the city such as the Eiffel Tower, the Arc de Triomphe and a sidewalk café.

In regards to these rumours, her spokesperson only cared to remark that she is currently away from Hong Kong and could not comment further until she was given more details on the matter.

Isabella and Richard's love story was described as a modern fairy tale by the Hong Kong media before their amicable break-up in one and a half years ago. They met on a movie set when she was 19 and he was 41 and the following year, Isabella gave birth to their first son.

Although they were not officially married, they have a son and a pair of twin boys together.

You should also read the other side of the story.

Not So Pretty Now

Her father was a descendant of a prominent Macanese family of Portuguese-English heritage, and her mother is Chinese. At age 12, Leong dropped out of school and signed a contract to Emperor Entertainment Group as a teenage model.

Isabella Leong Lok Chi and billionaire, Richard Li met in 2007 through The Mummy 3’s co-star, Michelle Yeoh. Since then, Isabella was branded as “Cinderella” in dating the wealthy Richard. In April 2009, Isabella gave birth to their son, Ethan Lee. In 2010, Isabella gave birth to a pair of twin boys. When Isabella announced her split from Richard Li on February 26th, many negative rumors speculated the cause of their break-up.

An inside source stated, “Bella and Richard were truly in love. When Ethan was born, Richard loved them dearly. Richard even renovated his mansion in Hong Kong to accommodate Bella and Ethan moving in with him. However, Isabella felt bored and often asked Richard to spend more time with her. She even flew to Hong Kong by herself to find her friends. Richard accommodated her and went home directly after work to spend more time together. Since living together in Hong Kong attracted attention from the paparazzi, Richard asked Bella to return to Canada .

“After giving birth to twin boys last year, Bella said she wanted to resume her acting career. She even said that she can earn money to raise her children. Perhaps Bella wanted a man to love and pay more attention to her. However, Richard was not very happy over this.” According to the inside source, Bella and Richard had numerous arguments, finally resulting in their decision to end to the relationship.

I knew a guy who also had a divorce after his foreign wife find him too engrossed with his biz and not paying attention to the family.

I bet her nipples are big, puffy and black black leow, having been pregnant three times.

Yucks!

She is stunningly beautiful... too bad money alone cannot keep a woman

Isabella Leong (梁洛施) is no longer the sexy model/actress she used to be, after giving birth to the three sons of Asia’s richest family.

The 23-year-old was photographed returning from Canada to Hong Kong, alone, on Sunday, and was clearly carrying extra luggage (fat).

She also looked plain and dumpy.

Isabella broke up with boyfriend Richard Li (李泽楷) in late February and has been living in Canada, raising their three kids.

It was rumored that Isabella plans to return to the showbiz but she “has not received any scripts,” said her spokesperson.

Richard is the son of “Asia’s richest man” Li Ka-shing (李嘉诚).

I bet her money will run out in a few years time and she needs to go back to show biz again.

But then the Li family will likely continue to feed her ...

I heard she was with a young French boyfriend. She's rich lah. For every child she bore she gets lots of money ! And she got her separation fee for Li too.

Re: Not So Pretty Now

Why get married at all? If you are capable, bang these women but don't sign the marriage contract with them. Don't destroy your freedom.

Even the most gorgeous women look like shit with the ravages of time and especially after childbirth. Look at Christy Chung.

Would you sign a lifelong handphone contract which explicitly states that you're never ever allowed to upgrade to a newer model? And if you do, you'll have to pay a heavy penalty fee?

Women are like handphones: some are more expensive, some are more beautiful, but sooner or later they all break down, get scratched, lose their 'new phone smell', get functionally obsolete... then you have to upgrade. Trade in for a newer model before it completely loses its value.