Category: Writers from Guayaquil

Alfredo Pareja Diezcanseco

Alfredo Pareja Diezcanseco was an Ecuadorian novelist, essayist, journalist, historian and statesman. He was born in Guayaquil on October 12, 1908 and died in Quito on May 1, 1993. He was part of a literary group called the “Group of Guayaquil,” whose members utilized realism in their stories. The other members of the group were José de la Cuadra, Joaquin Gallegos Lara, Demetrio Aguilera Malta and Enrique Gil Gilbert. Among the many government posts he held throughout his lifetime, he was elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1944 and was made Minister of Foreign Affairs in 1979. In 1979 he was awarded the Eugenio Espejo Award, the most important literary prize in Ecuador.

Continue reading “Alfredo Pareja Diezcanseco”

Ernesto Noboa y Caamaño

Ernesto Noboa y Caamaño (Guayaquil, August 2, 1889 – Quito, December 7, 1927) was an Ecuadorian poet. Together with Arturo Borja, Humberto Fierro and Medardo Ángel Silva, Noboa was part of the group of poets known as the “Decapitated Generation,” so called for the premature death of its members. This group represents the apogee of the modernismo literary movement in Ecuador. Almost all of Noboa’s work, marked by anxiety and loathing, was collected in a book entitled “Romanza de las Horas” (Romance of the Hours), published in 1922. For some, his poem “Emoción vesperal” (Vesperal Emotion) marked a new era of poetry in Ecuador. The poem, which speaks about taking an afternoon trip to sea without a set course, with sorrow dying as the day dies out, is an allegory for death. He is one of the most read poets in Ecuador, and many of his poems are recited and sung by the people.

Continue reading “Ernesto Noboa y Caamaño”

Alfredo Gangotena

Alfredo Gangotena Fernandez Salvador (Guayaquil, April 19, 1904 – Quito, December 23, 1944) was an Ecuadorian poet who wrote in French and Spanish. In Paris in the 1920’s he befriended Jean Cocteau, Jules Supervielle, Henri Michaux and Max Jacob.

Continue reading “Alfredo Gangotena”

Medardo Ángel Silva

Medardo Ángel Silva Rodas (Guayaquil, June 8, 1898 – Guayaquil, June 10, 1919) was an Ecuadorian poet and member of the “Generación decapitada” [Decapitated Generation]. He is considered the most pure of Ecuadorian modernists. The “Decapitated Generation” is a moniker given by journalists and historians to to a group of 4 writers in early 20th century Ecuador, because of similarities in their poetry and because they each died at a young age. The four members of the group are Medardo Ángel Silva and Ernesto Noboa y Caamaño from Guayaquil, and Arturo Borja and Humberto Fierro from Quito. The cause of Silva’s death is not certain; he died at 21 while visiting a young girlfriend. He is believed to have committed suicide, but may have been murdered as the result of a love triangle. Among his most famous poems is “El alma en los labios” [My soul on my lips], made famous in a song by Ecuadorian singer Julio Jaramillo.

Continue reading “Medardo Ángel Silva”

Jacinto de Evia

Jacinto de Evia (Guayaquil, circa 1629 – 17??) was a priest and poet from the Spanish colonial period in Guayaquil, in what is now Ecuador. He is considered the first erotic poet of Ecuadorian literature because of poems he wrote in his younger years which he published in a book entitled, “Ramillete de Varias Flores Poéticas“ (Spain, 1675). The book also contains poems by his mentor Antonio de Bastidas and Hernando Domínguez Camargo. Some year prior to 1650, he traveled to Quito to study at the seminary school of San Luis, of the Society of Jesus, where he became a pupil of the great poet Antonio de Bastidas.

Continue reading “Jacinto de Evia”

Rita Lecumberri

Rita Lecumberri Robles (Guayaquil, November, 14, 1831 – Guayaquil, December 23, 1910) was an Ecuadorian writer and educator. She was a published and awarded poet and essayist. She is also noted for her contribution to the education of women in Ecuador. She was director of the Escuela San Alejo in 1880-82 and 1882-95. A school, (El colegio Rita Lecumberri) is named after her as well as an award.

Continue reading “Rita Lecumberri”

J.D. Santibáñez

J.D. Santibáñez, born José Daniel Santibáñez (Guayaquil, 1959) is an Ecuadorian science fiction novelist and comic book writer. He studied Illustration at Parsons School of Design in New York. Santibáñez’s literary contributions include two notable novels: “Ejecútese el mañana” (2001; Execute Tomorrow), a thrilling blend of science fiction and noir set in the near future, and “El mago” (2003; The Magician), a captivating fusion of fantasy, supernatural elements, and action. Displaying his creative versatility, Santibáñez also delved into the realm of comic books, crafting the critically acclaimed “Cómic Book” (2008), a compilation of 27 enthralling graphic stories encompassing science fiction and crime. Alongside his remarkable artistic achievements, Santibáñez shares his knowledge and expertise as a professor at institutions such as the Escuela Superior Politécnica del Litoral (ESPOL), Universidad Santa María (USM), and Universidad de Especialidades Espíritu Santo (UEES). His written works, whether in prose or sequential art, enthrall readers with their fast-paced, darkly ironic, and immensely entertaining narratives populated by a diverse cast of characters, ranging from cowboys and time travelers to hitmen and apocalyptic monsters.

Continue reading “J.D. Santibáñez”

Jorge Pérez Concha

Jorge Pérez Concha (Guayaquil, June 5, 1908 – Guayaquil, April 1, 1995) was an Ecuadorian historian, biographer, writer, and diplomat. He wrote biographies of Eloy Alfaro, Luis Vargas Torres, and his uncle Carlos Concha Torres, among others. In 1989 Pérez was awarded the Eugenio Espejo Award in Culture by the president of Ecuador.

Continue reading “Jorge Pérez Concha”

Miguel Donoso Pareja

Miguel Donoso Pareja (Guayaquil, July 13, 1931 – Ibidem, March 16, 2015) was an acclaimed Ecuadorian writer whose literary contributions left an indelible mark on the cultural landscape of his country. Known for his experimental narrative style, introspective explorations of themes, and dedication to promoting literature, Donoso Pareja’s impact extended far beyond the pages of his books. Through his workshops and mentorship, he nurtured the talents of aspiring writers, fostering a new generation of literary voices. His works, ranging from novels and poetry to essays and short stories, challenged conventions and invited readers to engage with complex ideas. Despite facing health challenges in his later years, Donoso Pareja’s passion for literature remained unwavering until his passing. His legacy as a writer, mentor, and cultural advocate endures, continuing to inspire and enrich the literary world in Ecuador and beyond. In recognition of his contribution to Ecuadorian literature, he was bestowed the Eugenio Espejo Prize in 2006, Ecuador’s highest literary award.

Continue reading “Miguel Donoso Pareja”

José Martínez Queirolo

José Miguel Martínez Queirolo (Guayaquil, March 22, 1931 – Guayaquil, October 8, 2008) was an Ecuadorian playwright and writer. He was awarded the national theater award on four occasions for his plays, La casa del qué dirán (1962), Los unos vs. Los otros (1968), La dama meona (1976) and La conquista no ha terminado todavía (1983). He was the 2001 recipient of the Eugenio Espejo Award in Literature, awarded to him by Ecuador’s president.

Continue reading “José Martínez Queirolo”

Enrique Avellán Ferrés

Enrique Avellán Ferrés (Guayaquil, December 11, 1904 – Quito, 1984) was a distinguished Ecuadorian novelist, playwright, and legal scholar, celebrated for his contributions to both the literary and legal fields. Author of the compelling novel “La enorme pasión,” the critically acclaimed three-act play “Como los árboles” (1927), and the innovative musical fantasy “La rebelión del museo” (1969), Avellán Ferrés carved out a unique space in Ecuadorian culture. After earning a degree in social and political sciences from the University of Guayaquil, he went on to achieve notable success, including winning literary prizes and playing a pivotal role in copyright law advocacy, further establishing his legacy as a multifaceted intellectual force in Ecuador.

Continue reading “Enrique Avellán Ferrés”

Eugenia Viteri

Blanca Eugenia Viteri Segura (Guayaquil, July 4, 1928 – Quito, September 21, 2023) is an Ecuadorian novelist, short story writer, anthologist, women’s rights activist, and teacher. Viteri has published over a dozen books including novels, short story collections, and anthologies. Her work has been translated into English, Russian, and Bulgarian. She has been a member of the House of Ecuadorian Culture since 1962. She founded the Manuela Sáenz Cultural Foundation in 1983. Through her work with the foundation, Viteri became one of the most important defenders of women’s rights in Ecuador. In 2008, President Rafael Correa honored her with the Rosa Campuzano National Prize. She was among the first to receive the newly created award, which recognizes the work of noteworthy Ecuadorian women.

Continue reading “Eugenia Viteri”

Pedro Jorge Vera

Pedro Jorge Vera (Guayaquil, June 16, 1914 – Guayaquil, March 5, 1999) was an Ecuadorian journalist, novelist, short story writer, playwright, poet, university professor, and a politician from the Communist Party of Ecuador. He published and contributed to several controversial newspapers and magazines, such as “La Calle”, with the writer Alejandro Carrión, and “La Mañana”. He remained throughout his life a close friend of Cuban president Fidel Castro. Vera was the paternal uncle of Prima Ballerina Noralma Vera Arrata.

Continue reading “Pedro Jorge Vera”

Eduardo Varas

Eduardo Varas Carvajal (Guayaquil, 1979) is an Ecuadorian novelist, musician and journalist, currently living in Quito. He studied Social Communication at the Catholic University of Santiago de Guayaquil and was a member of Miguel Donoso Pareja’s Writer’s Workshop. He has worked for the newspapers El Comercio, El Universo, El Expreso, and El Telégrafo, as well as the magazines SoHo, Mundo Diners, and Ecuador Infinito. In 2007, he published “Conjeturas para una tarde,” a collection of short stories, and in 2008, he was included in the online anthology “El futuro no es nuestro,” along with several other Latin American short story writers. In 2010, he wrote the novel “Los descosidos.” In 2021, he won the Miguel Donoso Pareja Award for his short novel “Las tres versiones,” which was based on the true story of Ecuador’s youngest serial killer, Juan Fernando Hermosa. In 2021, he published his latest novel “Esas criaturas.”

Continue reading “Eduardo Varas”

Yanna Hadatty

Yanna Hadatty Mora (Guayaquil, 1969) is an Ecuadorian essayist and short story writer. Haddatty has lived in Mexico since 1992, where she finished her higher education and worked as a professor. She received her doctorate in Ibero-American Literature from the Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), where she later worked as a professor and contemporary literature researcher. She also taught at the University of Sor Juana Cloister and the UAM Xochimilco. She is a full member of Ecuador’s House of Culture and the Executive Secretary of the Association of Ecuadorians in Mexico. She has been a member of Mexico’s National System of Researchers since 2005.

Continue reading “Yanna Hadatty”