Drew Sidora’s husband attended singer Mýa’s recent performance in Atlanta and he was drooling all over the superstar!

Last week, Mýa Harrison, 42, performed in Atlanta and one of her guests was The Real Housewives of Atlanta star, Ralph Pittman. Mýa had a show at Atlanta’s Nouveau Bar and Grill where a lot of her fans came to support her. She looked stunning with large hoop earrings, white knee-high boots, and a colorful large shirt. The R&B singer’s fans enjoyed her performance including Drew’s husband.

Drew’s absence at the concert didn’t stop Ralph from having the time of his life. The RHOA star had a huge smile on his face while he posed next to the talented singer. Ralph, who was dressed in all black, could be seen approaching the “Free” singer while she was in her section. Mýa is a singer, songwriter, dancer, and actress who has been awarded for her contributions to music.

Mýa won her first Grammy Award in the category of Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals for her rendition of Labelle’s 1975 hit “Lady Marmalade” along with Pink, Christina Aguilera, and Lil’ Kim, which topped the charts globally. Billboard listed Mýa as one of their Hot 100 Artists of the 2000s, placing her in the 97th position. As of October 2020, she has sold over 3.2 million albums in the U.S. and 7 million albums worldwide.

Ever since Ralph and his wife, Drew, joined the cast of The Real Housewives of Atlanta in season 13, their marital issues have played out for viewers on every episode. During the season, Ralph took off for a few days after a fight with Drew and didn’t tell her where he was or who he was with. After evading the question all season, he finally told her he went to Tampa, Florida, to clear his head. In a recent episode, the couple tries to work on their relationship by going to a therapist.

RHOA fans have been vocal about Ralph’s treatment of Drew. One fan said on Twitter, “Drew he doesn’t care about your tears, effort, nothing! Ralph is a piece of sh*t… you can do better #RHOA he’s a controlling narcissist!” Another person added that Drew deserved better than being with Ralph. “Drew and Ralph are the definition of sticking around ‘for the kids’ because what is this mess on National TV!”