Cotui - Dominican Republic

Cotui is the capital of the province of Sanchez Ramirez in the center of the Dominican Republic to approximately 62 miles from Santo Domingo, is one of the oldest city of the Dominican Republic.It was founded in 1505 in the governance of Nicolas de Ovando by people attracted to the site by the number of gold deposits had the region. Cotui was the name of indigenous leader who ruled the region before the Spanish colonization.

Since the sixteenth century, the history of Cotui has been linked to the mining industry. Today, Barrick Gold continues to exploit its gold, silver, bauxite and nickel.

However, the main economic activity of the municipality has been and continues to be agriculture, particularly rice production. Thank you to the Hatillo dam, the largest artificial lake in the Caribbean, is particularly suitable for rice cultivation. Also a considerable production of fruits such as pineapples and oranges.

At Cotui the most important tourist attraction for both locals and foreigners are the caves: Guácaras Taino, a cave of archaeological and historical importance.

Tourism is almost zero, there are a few small hotels in Cotui.

Tourist attractions and places to visit in Cotui

The main festival of Cotui

During 9 days in early September is the feast in honor of the Immaculate Conception, with sports and art, fireworks...

Carnival

Carnival is renowned for its Papeluses and Platanus, characters whose costume is made of paper and banana leaves.

Immaculate Conception Church

The Church of Immaculate Conception Cotui was built in 1741, destroyed in 1946 by an earthquake and rebuilt in 1957, is located across from Central Park.

What to see, what to do, what to visit near Cotui

Caves

Called Guaracas Tainas, they contain images and carved figures of the time of the Tainos having a cross shape which according to experts express the rainy months. This is a major tourist attraction of Cotui.

Hoyo de Sanabe

This cave is located near Lake Hatillo dam where human skeletons have been found and which has many paintings Taino (animals, plants, objects ...).

Hatillo dam

This dam is located in the town of Hatillo 6 km from the city, the largest artificial lake in the Caribbean. A boat offers you a ride of 30 minutes on the lake you can see caves, birds and fish.

Share your experience, give your opinion on Cotui.

You know tourist sites (natural sites, monuments, lakes, rivers, waterfalls, beaches, caves, hikes, excursions, parks, museums...) and you want to share them and make them discover, send us all the information and will publish. Contact.

0 opinion :

Average rating : 4 / 5 (1 notes)

Accessibility : 2 (0 = very easy ... 5 = very difficult)

+ add a review