…AS CONNOISSEUR MEDIA IN LONG ISLAND & CONNECTICUT LAUNCH SPECai TO POWER THEIR LOCAL SALES EFFORTS WITH CUTTING EDGE COMMERCIAL CREATIVE SPEC SPOTS

SPECai blends AI scripts and AI voices with Benztown music beds to create fully produced SPEC commercials in seconds.

RYE, NY, February 12, 2024 — COMPASS MEDIA NETWORKS announces CONNOISEUR MEDIA’s stations in Connecticut and Long Island as charter affiliates for SPECai, a joint venture between Compass Media Networks, Benztown, and ENCO, that provides radio stations with creative custom spec commercials in mere seconds using powerful AI technology.

Connoisseur Media’s Long Island and Connecticut clusters including WALK-FM, WBZO-FM, WEBE-FM, WEZN-FM, WHLI-AM, WICC-AM, WKJY-FM, WPLR-FM and WWSK-FM are the first to officially sign on.

David Bevins, Chief Operating Officer / Long Island General Manager of Connoisseur, comments, “We all desire to win new business and the usage of spec spots is vitally important. With the innovative SPECai, crafting three creative scripts, selecting from a variety of voices, and even orchestrating a music bed has become astonishingly effortless. It’s the quickest and most efficient way to generate compelling spec spots, created by radio people for radio people. SPECai allows your reps to hit the streets and sell more radio.”

Kristin Okesson, Senior Vice President / Connecticut Market Manager of Connoisseur adds, “With SPECai, we get efficiency, creativity, and quality all in one place. It transforms the way we create spec spots — three different scripts, an incredibly realistic AI voice, and the added benefit of Benztown music. It’s a unique blend of tech, creativity, and convenience that our local sales team values.”

To schedule a demo or find out more about SPECai contact Nancy Abramson, Senior Vice President of Affiliate Sales & Content, (914) 708-1451

nabramson@compassmedianetworks.com

About Benztown

Benztown is a leading international audio imaging, production library, voiceover, programming, podcasting, and jingle production company with over 3,000 affiliations on six different continents. With studios in Los Angeles, New York, and Stuttgart, Benztown offers the highest quality audio imaging workparts for 23 libraries across 14 music and spoken word formats. Benztown also provides custom VO and imaging across all formats, including commercial VO and copywriting. Benztown provides audio brands and radio stations of all formats with end-to-end imaging and production, making high-quality sound and world- class audio branding a reality for radio stations of all market sizes and budgets. www.benztown.com.

About ENCO

Founded in 1983, ENCO pioneered the use of computer-based, digital audio and program automation for radio stations and TV studios. The company has since evolved its award-winning product line to span all aspects of today’s automated broadcast and production workflows, including closed and open captioning, visual radio, audio compliance, instant media playout, remote contribution, and cloud-based web streaming. It also brings the benefits of its patented captioning and live audio/video playout innovations to professional AV environments including conference rooms, lecture halls, sporting arenas and event venues. For more information, please visit: www.enco.com.

###