The Nashville Rebel Box Set comprises of ninety-two songs by Waylon Jennings recorded between 1958 and 1994. Buddy Holly produced the first track of the box set, "Jole Blon." There are also duets with Willie Nelson, "Mamas Don't Let Your Babies Grow Up to Be Cowboys," and Johnny Cash, "The Greatest Cowboy of Them All," which was previously unreleased. This Waylon Jennings box set is a must-have for anyone who wants the best Waylon Jennings songs all in one place. It also includes a lavish book with unseen Waylon Jennings pictures and memorabilia. Gotta have it.

Track Listing

Disc 1

Jole Blon

My Baby Walks All Over Me

That's the Chance I'll Have to Take

Stop the World (And Let Me Off)

Anita, You're Dreaming

Time to Bum Again

(That's What You Get) For Lovin' Me

Green River

Nashville Rebel

Mental Revenge

Love of the Common People

The Chokin' Kind

Walk on out of My Mind

I Got You

Only Daddy That'll Walk the Line

Yours Love

Just to Satisfy You

Something's Wrong in California

Brown Eyed Handsome Man

Cedartown, Georgia

I Ain't the One

Singer of Sad Songs

It's Sure Been Fun

Six White Horses

People in Dallas Got Hair

Disc 2

The Taker

Mississippi Woman

Lovin' Her Was Easier (Than Anything I'll Ever Do Again)

(Don't Let the Sun Set on You) Tulsa

Sweet Dream Woman

Ladies Love Outlaws

Under Your Spell Again

Lonesome, On'ry and Mean

Pretend I Never Happened

You Can Have Her

Honky Tonk Heroes

Black Rose

We Had It All

You Ask Me To

This Time

It's Not Supposed to Be That Way

Slow Rollin' Low

I'm a Ramblin' Man

Rainy Day Woman

Amanda

Bob Wills Is Still the King

Are You Sure Hank Done It This Way

Waymore's Blues

The Door Is Always Open

Dreaming My Dreams with You

Disc 3

"T" for Texas

Freedom to Stay

Good Hearted Woman

Suspicious Minds

Can't You See

Are You Ready for the Country

MacArthur Park (Revisited)

Jac-A-Diamonds

Luckenbach, Texas (Back to the Basics of Love)

Brand New Goodbye Song

The Wurlitzer Prize (I Don't Want to Get Over You)

Mammas Don't Let Your Babies Grow Up to Be Cowboys

There Ain't No Good Chain Gang

I've Always Been Crazy

Don't You Think This Outlaw Bit's Done Got out of Hand

The Greatest Cowboy of Them All

Come with Me

I Ain't Living Long Like This

Clyde

Theme from the Dukes of Hazzard (Good Ol' Boys)

Disc 4

Storms Never Last

Shine

Just to Satisfy You

Women Do Know How to Carry On

(Sittin' On) The Dock of the Bay

Lucille (You Won't Do Your Daddy's Will)

Breakin' Down

Take It to the Limit

The Conversation

I May Be Used (But Baby I Ain't Used Up)

Never Could Toe the Mark

America

Waltz Me to Heaven

Highwayman

Drinkin' and Dreamin'

Working Without a Net

Will the Wolf Survive?

What You'll Do When I'm Gone

Rose in Paradise

Rough and Rowdy Days

Wrong

I Do Believe

The Waylon Jennings Merch Company works directly with Waylon Jennings' estate to create quality product for people just like ourselves, his fans. Your satisfaction is our number one priority, all items are returnable or exchangeable within 14 days as long as they are in their original condition. We do our best to keep our inventory up to date, but due to the fast pace of our shop's sales and our small staff there are occasionally items that are out of stock. You will be alerted by the following business day if this is the case. We appreciate your understanding in these matters, as we are trying to constantly improve in this and every other arena to provide quality Waylon Jennings merchandise. Our office hours are 10 AM - 6 PM PST, Monday through Friday. We will answer all emails within one business day to the best of our ability.