After outlaw country singer Waylon Jennings died at 64 in 2002, his widow, Jessi Colter, decided to keep his presence in Nashville, Tennessee. But, more than a decade later, Colter slowly started bringing his belongings back to her residence in Phoenix.

As she went through Jennings' things, Colter reminisced about the story behind each, like the red Ariel Cyclone motorcycle that originally belonging to his close friend Buddy Holly, but was gifted to Jennings after Holly's death.

Jennings, a Littlefield native, had been set to fly on the plane that crashed in 1959, killing Holly, Ritchie Valens and J.P. "The Big Bopper" Richardson, but he gave up his seat at the last minute.

"It's a walk through the past that is not with great exhilaration," Colter said. "It brings remembrance to the loss and so even though I'm very healed and very happy that Waylon isn't suffering any longer, I don't think I can keep (going through his stuff)."

Colter, also a country singer, will sell more than 2,000 of Jennings' belongings during the "Remembering Waylon" auction Sunday at the Musical Instrument Museum in Phoenix.

Residents can also bid on items online, including rare photos of Willie Nelson and Buddy Holly, Jennings' favorite pair of boots, handwritten lyrics, national music award trophies, a thank-you letter from Rosie O'Donnell, a note from Johnny Cash, a handwritten letter from John Lennon and training gloves and a ring robe from his personal hero, Muhammad Ali.

Jennings' widow is even auctioning off two braided pigtails, which Nelson famously cut off in 1983 to cheer on Jennings during his path to sobriety. The suggested bidding price for the locks of hair is $24,000 and a portion of the proceeds will benefit Phoenix Children's Hospital.

Arlan Ettinger, president of Guernsey's, the New York City-based auction house hosting the event, said he first approached Colter about selling the motorcycle, but once he saw the vast history behind Jennings' belongings, the two formed a partnership and began organizing the auction early this year.

"It became evident that she had far more than the motorcycle," Ettinger said. "We started talking about the possibility of a big event. ... She came to the understanding that storing things simply for the sake of storage may not have been the best resolution for these objects but rather to let Waylon and Jessi's legions of fans have a shot of (owning) and celebrating the remarkable life of Waylon Jennings."

Colter said she loved learning new things about her late husband as she went through his belongings. And, while she plans to keep and pass down many heirlooms to her children and grandchildren, she's ready to share some of them with the world.

"When we were going through and everything is tagged (to sell), I kind of had that feeling in my stomach for a moment that this will all be gone. But you just have to stand flat footed and face these things," she said. "You can't run from it. If you just face it, then it passes. I really don't think I could pass through these things again. It's enough already. I'll be glad to figure out what I'll do next with that space because I've kept what I want near me. ... Memories."

sarah.rafique@lubbockonline.com

• 766-2159

Follow Sarah on Twitter

@SarahRafique