Current Issue • Departments • Bibliography

RESULTS OF F&SF COMPETITION #76

"Childish Things"

IN OUR last competition, entrants rewrote their favorite genre stories in the style of the author as a child. As you can see, some children were less mature (and therefore more entertaining) than others. We're giving the funny ones a gold star.

Special mention goes to Matthew King, whose entry almost but not quite mirrored the second place winner.

FIRST PRIZE:

Dune, by Frank Herbert

Bad guys kill this kid's whole family, but he hooks up with the coolest guys on the planet: These bad-ass warriors in black leather cruising around the desert in boss dune buggies. No, wait! Better! They're cruising around the desert riding—GIANT WANGS!

—Matthew Sanborn Smith

Port St. Lucie, FL

SECOND PRIZE:

Time Enough for Love, by Robert Heinlein

When I get older I'm going to be a soldier and fight in a war and come home and marry Mommy.

—Michael D. Turner

Colorado Springs, CO

HONORABLE MENTIONS:

"The Lurking Fear" by H. P. Lovecraft

Even now being a full ten years old, I can hear the creaking of the swings swaying back and forth as they break the laws of geometry invented by that Greek guy whose name I keep forgetting.

—Byron Bailey

Jonesboro, IN

"I Have No Mouth and I Must Scream" by Harlan Ellison

My little brother bugs me all day when I am home from school. I hate him, but Mom says I shouldn't say things like that. So now I pretend I have no mouth and I scream as loud as I can with my mouth closed at my brother. Hah hah!

—Steven L. Rosenhaus

Forest Hills, NY

When Worlds Collide, by Philip Wylie

This big planet smacks into the Earth, splatt!! wham!! and the Earth explodes, wha-booom!! and everybody dies "oh no! oh no! aaaaaaa!! aaaaaaa!!" but these scientists built a spaceship, and everyone was like "let us on! let us on!" so they shot them, rattattatt!! and flew to the new planet, ka-whoosh!!

—Mark Shainblum

Montreal, Quebec, Canada

F&SF COMPETITION #77: FOUND IN TRANSLATION

Take a science fiction/fantasy story title and translate it into a different language. (We suggest you run potential titles through a translator like babelfish.yahoo.com.) Then rewrite the plot based on the new title, and make it as wacky as your imagination allows.

You have six chances to make us laugh. Make sure your entries are no more than fifty words apiece, and remember to include your address. Really. We mean it.

Example:

I, Robot by Isaac Asimov = Yo, Robusteza (Spanish)

Herbie the Robot noticed Susan Calvin was attracted to Milton Ashe. Herbie suggested Ashe might notice her if she were stronger, more robust. Or just had a larger bust.