To ensure that WVC, its directors, employees, volunteers and others who work with WVC are compliant with Canadian and international law in carrying out its mission and to protect WVC, its operations, programs and partners from those who may want use WVC as a cover for illegal activities and/or would seek to divert the gifts entrusted to WVC to support terrorist activities.

Background:

WVC is a Christian relief, development and advocacy organization dedicated to working with children, families and communities to overcome poverty and injustice. WVC has a strong and abiding commitment to carry out its charitable mission wherever it is needed in the world and provides humanitarian assistance in accordance to the key humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and independence, as well as in adherence to international humanitarian law. WVC works vigorously to prevent any resources from being diverted from its mission, safeguard its beneficiaries and personnel, and protect its reputation, all with the goal of providing maximum support to its beneficiaries.

WVC has vast experience in dealing with the challenges inherent in carrying out charitable work in some of the world’s most dangerous areas. The nature of work undertaken by WVC means that it often serves in areas that have extreme instability and a fragile infrastructure. The needs in these communities are often dire and the threat of danger may be great. Full due diligence on the part of WVC is not always possible or safe. In these circumstances, the organization’s ability to be of assistance and the safety of those delivering assistance, as well as those receiving such assistance, may be at serious risk. While it is the mission of WVC to provide humanitarian aid, this must be balanced with the need to protect WVC employees, contractors and volunteers within these communities.

WVC’s practices and procedures are developed with the aim to prevent WVC from being involved in or supporting terrorism, either directly or indirectly. Supporting terrorism includes not only providing money to terrorists, but also helping terrorists move from country to country, providing propaganda for terrorist causes, allowing terrorists to use facilities or equipment, helping terrorists launder money or having any links to terrorism, either formal or informal.

Scope:

This policy applies to all employees, Representatives and volunteers of WVC.

Responsibility for this Policy

WVC Legal Services

The WVC Legal Services shall be responsible for monitoring legislation and regulations relating to this Policy and for maintaining the currency of this Policy.

Any breach of this Policy may result in disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment, appointment, or contract as applicable.

WVC Persons

The following are responsibilities of WVC Persons to be used in order to ascertain the identity of those with whom WVC works, to achieve clarity in working relationships and to avoid, advertently or inadvertently, supporting terrorism:

Due Diligence

·WVC Persons have a responsibility, when negotiating and entering into contracts on behalf of WVC, at all times, to ensure that WVC does not engage with listed people or listed entities deemed by the Government of Canada to be terrorist groups or organized crime gangs (“Listed Entity” and/or “Listed Entities”). WVC Persons responsible for purchasing goods or services of any description, accepting gifts or granting funds on behalf of WVC must, prior to undertaking any of these acts, review the lists published and periodically updated by the Government of Canada at: www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/ntnl-scrt/cntr-trrrsm/lstd-ntts/index-eng.aspx

·When contracting with outside parties, WVC Persons must not rely solely on an entity’s representatives or website, but be diligent and use reasonable efforts to ascertain the identity of those with whom they are dealing by researching the entity and/or, where possible, meeting with the entity’s representatives to ask appropriate questions and check reliable references. This procedure applies regardless of whether the party is a vendor, contractor, consultant, implementing partner, major donor or grantee , individual, partnership, corporation or NGO.

Written Contracts

·WVC Persons must use written contracts to record relationships where goods or services are purchased and for situations where WVC is either a grantor or conducting its own charitable activities through an intermediary, that clearly state (in addition to any other relevant clauses): the name(s) of all entities who are parties to the contract, details of the work/project and responsibilities of each party, a breakdown of expenditures to be made and how the funds will be used, the methods of monitoring and reporting, delivery or completion dates and grounds for termination of the contract.

Books and Records

·WVC Persons must keep adequate documentation, books and records of his/her engagement with all third parties, which will be retained at the WVChead office, as required by law.

Facilities and Equipment

·WVC Persons must maintain proper controls over facilities and equipment in order to ensure that they are used to support charitable purposes and will not allow its facilities and equipment to be used by those involved with or supporting terrorism.

Safeguard Personnel

·WVC Persons must be vigilant about security at all times. Risk to staff, including the possibility that staff could be wounded, kidnapped or killed, must be balanced with the benefits of providing humanitarian relief.In cases where there are significant threats to the safety and security of WVC Persons, WVC may identify that it is impossible to operate safely within a specific area and may suspend operations.

Major Gifts

·WVC Persons responsible for processing major donations must take all donations made by individuals or entities whose identity cannot, with reasonable effort, be ascertained or to which certain conditions are attached, to the Gift Acceptance Committee for a decision on how to proceed, if at all. WVC will not accept any donation from a Listed Entity or from a foreign state listed as a supporter of terrorism for purposes of the State Immunity Act, or from an agency of such a state.

Sanctions

·Canada has sanctions in place against a number of countries, individuals and entities and WVC Persons must be aware of and comply with those sanctions. WVC Persons should review the sanctions page of the DFATD website on an annual basis.

Please see the attached Schedule “A for additional information that reinforces the above-noted practices and procedures.

Reporting

In the event a WVC Person becomes aware that an individual or organization with which WVC has a relationship is a Listed Entity or is involved in activities that include violence or are illegal or unethical, then that person shall immediately inform the General Counsel and provide to her/him any information the WVC Person has pertaining to the individual or organization.

The Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and General Counsel shall immediately review the information and, if appropriate, conduct an investigation.If a decision to conduct an investigation, terminate the relationship and/or inform the government authorities is taken, the Executive Vice-President shall inform the President and the Board of Directors.

Definitions:

Representatives:Shall include, but may not be limited to, any individual, contractor, company, organization, and/or agency that acts on behalf of, for, or in association with World Vision Canada, pursuant to a contract or otherwise.

Terrorism: Terrorism in this policy has the definition provided in the Criminal Code of Canada, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46, s.83.01 and is summarized as follows: