Could 2023 be the year of Deepika Padukone and Shah Rukh Khan? The onscreen couple has starred in two blockbusters so far, both amassing over INR7 billion globally. Padukone made her massive Bollywood debut with Khan in Farah Khan's 2007 hit, Om Shanti Om. The duo has since starred in several films together.

Speaking about her films with Khan doing very well at the box office, the actor told The Week, “I’ve never been fascinated by numbers, whether it was maths in school or the numbers of Pathaan. I was just happy that cinemas had come alive again, that people had come alive again. I was really grateful for that."

While Jawan has minted over INR700 crore worldwide, Padukone revealed she didn't charge a dime for her pivotal role in Atlee's directorial. “I wanted to be a part of 83 because I wanted it to be an ode to women who stand behind their husbands' glory. I watched my mother do it. ibis was my homage to wives who make sacrifices to support their husbands' careers. Other than that, any special appearance for Shah Rukh Khan, I am there. Same with Rohit Shetty,” she said.

“We are each other's lucky charm. But honestly, we are beyond lucky. We have a sense of ownership over each other... I am one of the few people he is vulnerable with. There is so much trust and respect, and I think luck is just the cherry on the top," Padukone told the outlet.

Earlier this year, the Padmaavat star was seen with King Khan in Pathaan and is now receiving praise for her cameo in Jawan, which marks her fifth collaboration with the Dilwale star. Apart from Om Shanti Om, they have also co-starred in Happy New Year and Chennai Express. All their films together have done well at the box office.

Earlier this year, around Pathaan's release, in a video shared by the movie's production house, Yash Raj Films, Padukone had called Shah Rukh, her 'most favourite co-star'. She had said, “Shah Rukh and I have been very lucky to have had the opportunity to work in some incredible movies starting with Om Shanti Om. I'm collaborating with my favourite co-star, Shah Rukh. We have a beautiful relationship and I think the audience always see that in the movies that we do.”

Have something to add to the story? Share it in the comments below.