Deepika Padukone was a top model at the time (courtesy TheFarahKhan)

Highlights

It's already been 10 years of Om Shanti Om, directed by Farah Khan

Om Shanti Om was Deepika Padukone's Bollywood debut

Deepika Padukone was cast in dual roles in the movie

New Delhi: Hard to believe, but it's already been a decade since Deepika Padukone made her debut opposite Shah Rukh Khan in 2007 blockbuster Om Shanti Om, directed by Farah Khan. She was a top model at the time, and was cast in the double role of 70s' actress Shantipriya and the modern day Sandhya. Om Shanti Om released on November 9, 2007 and today, 10 years later, Farah Khan marked the milestone with shout-outs to both her lead stars. For Deepika, this picture from the photoshoot for the film by photographer Avinash Gowarikar - this, Farah explains, was the moment she knew Deepika Padukone was her Shantipriya.

A reminder, if any were needed, of why the world is so deeply dippy about Deepika:

Deepika, who has since become an international star, was singled out for praise over her performance in the reincarnation and revenge drama - as Shantipriya, the star murdered by her villainous lover, and as Sandhya, the hip young woman who looks just like Shantipriya and who is recruited by Shah Rukh Khan's reborn Om Kapoor in his plot to avenge the dead actress.

For Shah Rukh Khan, director Farah tweeted a reference to Dard-e-Disco, the outstanding feature of which song was Shah Rukh Khan's abs.

SRK responded in like manner:

Om Shanti Om was the first of three films SRK and Deepika collaborated on - several years later, they starred in Chennai Express and Happy New Year, the last of which was also directed by Farah Khan.

Promoted

Listen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.com

Deepika Padukone has a big release coming up soon in Padmavati, currently the focus of attention from several groups which claim they are concerned it misrepresents the legend of Rajput queen Padmini who is believed to have committed jauhar to escape invading Emperor Alauddin Khilji. Deepika plays Padmini with Ranveer Singh and Shahid Kapoor cast as Khilji and Rawal Ratan Singh.

Shah Rukh Khan, last seen in the poorly-received Jab Harry Met Sejal with Anushka Sharma, is currently working on a project in which he plays a dwarf.

.