In this article, the family name is Borisov.

Simeon Borisov Saxe-Coburg-Gotha (Bulgarian: Симеон Борисов Сакскобургготски, romanized: Simeon Borisov Sakskoburggotski, [simeˈɔn boˈrisof sakskoburˈɡɔtski]; born 16 June 1937) is a Bulgarian politician who reigned as the last tsar of the Kingdom of Bulgaria as Simeon II from 1943 until 1946. He was six years old when his father Boris III of Bulgaria died in 1943. Royal power was exercised on his behalf by a regency council led by Simeon's uncle Kiril, Prince of Preslav, General Nikola Mihov and prime minister, Bogdan Filov. In 1946 the monarchy was abolished by referendum, and Simeon was forced into exile.

Simeon returned to his home country in 1996, formed the political party National Movement for Stability and Progress (NMSP) and was elected Prime Minister of the Republic of Bulgaria from July 2001 until August 2005. In the next elections, as a leader of NMSP, he took part in a coalition government with the Bulgarian Socialist Party. In 2009, after NMSP failed to win any seats in Parliament, he left politics.

Simeon is, along with the 14th Dalai Lama, one of only two living people who were heads of state from the time of World War II, although both held mostly symbolic roles in their government's position.

Royal history

Simeon was born to Boris III of Bulgaria and Giovanna of Italy. Following his birth, Boris III sent an air force officer to the Jordan River to obtain water for Simeon's baptism in the Orthodox faith. He succeeded to the throne on 28 August 1943 upon the death of his father, who had just returned to Bulgaria from a meeting with Adolf Hitler. Since Simeon was only six years old, his uncle Prince Kiril, Prime Minister Bogdan Filov, and Lt. General Nikola Mihov of the Bulgarian Army were appointed regents.

Under his father, Bulgaria joined the Axis powers in World War II but managed to preserve diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. Still, on 5 September 1944 Stalin declared war on Bulgaria and three days later, the Red Army entered the country without encountering resistance. On the next day, 9 September 1944, Prince Kyril and the other regents were deposed by a Soviet-backed coup and arrested. The three regents, all members of the last three governments, Parliament deputies, heads of the army and eminent journalists were executed by the Communists in February 1947.

Towards exile

The royal family — Queen Giovanna, Simeon, and his sister Maria-Louisa — remained at Vrana Palace, near Sofia, while three new regents were appointed, all Communists (Todor Pavlov, Venelin Ganev and Tsvetko Boboshevski). On 15 September 1946, a referendum was held in the presence of the Soviet army. It proposed abolishing the monarchy and declaring a republic. Official figures showed a 95.6% approval for ending 68 years of monarchy. This referendum actually violated the Tarnovo Constitution, which held that any change in the form of the state could only be implemented by a Grand National Assembly convened by the tsar.

On 16 September 1946, the royal family was exiled from Bulgaria while given a way to take out large amount of movable property. They first went to Alexandria, Egypt, where Simeon's grandfather Victor Emmanuel III, the former king of Italy, lived in exile. There, in 1951, Simeon studied at Victoria College (along with Crown Prince Leka of Albania). In July 1951, General Francisco Franco's dictatorship in Spain granted asylum to the family.

Education and business career

In Madrid, Simeon studied at the Lycée Français. On 16 June 1955, upon turning 18, in accordance with the Tarnovo Constitution, Simeon read a proclamation to the Bulgarian people, claiming that he was Tsar of Bulgaria and confirming his will to be Tsar of all Bulgarians and to follow the principles contrary to those of the communist regime then ruling Bulgaria. In 1958, he enrolled at Valley Forge Military Academy and College in the United States, where he was known as "Cadet Rylski No. 6883", and he graduated as a second lieutenant. Once again in Spain (between 1959 and 1962), Simeon studied law and business administration.

He then became a businessman. For thirteen years, he was chairman of the Spanish subsidiary of Thomson, a French defense and electronics group. He was also an adviser in the banking, hotel, electronics, and catering sectors.

Marriage and issue

On 21 January 1962, Simeon married a Spanish aristocrat, Doña Margarita Gómez-Acebo y Cejuela. The couple have had five children – four sons (Kardam, Kiril, Kubrat and Konstantin) and a daughter, Kalina, all of whom subsequently married Spaniards. All of his sons received names of Bulgarian Tsars, his daughter has a Bulgarian name, although only four of his eleven grandchildren have Bulgarian names (Boris, Sofia, Mirko and Simeon).

Kardam (1962–2015) married Miriam Ungría y López. They had two sons, Boris and Beltran.

Kiril (born 1964) married María del Rosario Nadal y Fuster de Puigdórfila. They have three children: Mafalda, Olimpia and Tassilo.

Kubrat (born 1965) married Carla María de la Soledad Royo-Villanova y Urrestarazu. They have three sons: Mirko, Lukás and Tirso.

Konstantin-Assen (born 1967) married María García de la Rasilla y Gortázar. They have twins, Umberto and Sofia.

Kalina (born 1972) married Antonio José "Kitín" Muñoz y Valcárcel. They have a son, Simeon Hassan Muñoz.

Political return

In 1990, just months after the fall of communism, Simeon was issued a new Bulgarian passport. In 1996, fifty years after the abolition of the monarchy, Simeon returned to Bulgaria and was met in many places by crowds of approval. He did not, at that point, make any political announcements or moves, as he had already denied in a TV interview (1990) to have any material property claims against Bulgaria. However, these social sentiments gradually disappeared after his premiership, with Simeon making moves to take back large areas or real estate property in Bulgaria that was under the monarchy's governance before 1945.

In 2001, Simeon, who had by this time taken the name Simeon Borisov Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, announced he would return to Bulgaria to form a new political party, the National Movement Simeon II (later renamed to NMSP), dedicated to "reforms and political integrity." Simeon promised that in 800 days the Bulgarian people would feel tangible positive effects of his government and would enjoy significantly higher standards of living.

Prime Minister

For details on his cabinet, see Sakskoburggotski Government.

NMSP won a large victory in the parliamentary elections held on 17 June 2001, capturing 120 of the 240 seats in Parliament and defeating the two main pre-existing political parties. Simeon was sworn in as Prime Minister of Bulgaria on 24 July, forming a coalition with the ethnic Turkish party, Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF). He gave ministerial positions in his government mainly to technocrats and Western-educated economic specialists.

During his time in power, Bulgaria joined NATO, after he had agreed to enter into the U.S.-led coalition against Iraq. In 2002, he received the Path to Peace Award from the Path to Peace Foundation.

In the 2005 elections, Simeon's party ranked second and participated in the grand coalition government led by the Bulgarian Socialist Party and including the Movement for Rights and Freedoms. Simeon was given the unofficial ceremonial post of Chairman of the Coalition Council.

The party got just 3.01% of the votes and no seats at the parliamentary elections of 2009. Shortly after, on 6 July, Simeon also resigned as NMSP leader.

Views on restoration of the Bulgarian monarchy

Although not yet formally renouncing his claim to the Bulgarian throne, Simeon and his family take part in long orchestrated media campaigns and moves throughout Bulgarian political space. He used the title "Tsar of the Bulgarians" in his political statements during his exile. Since his return to Bulgaria, however, Simeon has consistently avoided revealing his views on the restoration of the Bulgarian monarchy, notwithstanding the original name of his party. Upon taking office as Prime Minister, Simeon swore to uphold the republican constitution.

Autobiography

Simeon wrote an autobiography in French under the title Simeon II de Bulgarie, un destin singulier that was released in Bulgaria on 28 October 2014. It was first presented at the headquarters of the UNESCO in Paris on 22 October 2014.

Titles and styles

16 June 1937 – 15 September 1946: His Royal Highness The Prince of Turnovo

15 September 1946 – present: His Majesty Tsar Simeon II of the Bulgarians (title of pretense and by courtesy)

24 July 2001 – present: Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha

In a statement published on its website on 1 May 2015, the Bulgarian Patriarchate announced that Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha will be referred to as Tsar of Bulgaria in all public and private services held in the dioceses of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church.

Dynastic honours

House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha-Koháry: Knight and Grand Master of the Order of Saints Cyril and Methodius

House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha-Koháry: Grand Master of the Royal Order of Saint Alexander

House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha-Koháry: Grand Master of the Royal Order of Bravery

House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha-Koháry: Grand Master of the Royal Order of Civil Merit

House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha-Koháry: Grand Master of the Royal Order of Military Merit

House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha-Koháry: Recipient of the Coming of age Medal of Tsar Simeon II

National state honours

Bulgaria: Grand Cross of the Order of Stara Planina

Bulgarian Ministry of Defence: Collar of the Order of Justice

Foreign state and dynastic honours

Belgium: Grand Cross of the Order of Leopold II

France: Grand Cross of the Order of the Legion of Honour

Orléans-French royal family: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Lazarus

Greek royal family: Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Order of the Redeemer

Italian royal family: Knight of the Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation

Vatican: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre

Sovereign Military Order of Malta: Bailiff Knight Grand Cross of Honour and Devotion of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta

Two Sicilian royal family:

Knight of the Royal Order of Saint Januarius

Bailiff Knight Grand Cross of the Two Sicilian Royal Sacred Military Order of Saint George

Jordan: Grand Cordon of the Supreme Order of the Renaissance

Jordan: Grand Cordon of the Order of Independence

Palestine: Grand Collar of the Order of Palestine

Portuguese royal family: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa

Russian imperial family: Knight of the Imperial Order of Saint Andrew

Spain:

Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Charles III

Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece

National awards

Bulgaria: Honorary degree of the National Guards Unit of Bulgaria

Bulgaria: Jubilee badge of honour of the Bulgarian Chitalishte community

Foreign awards

European Union: Paneuropean Union integration award

Romania: Honorary degree of the University of Bucharest

Spain: Adoptive Son of Madrid

Arms

Arms of the Sovereign of Bulgaria (1943–1946)

Personal arms of Simeon

Patronages

National patronages

Bulgaria: Patron of the National day of Bulgaria

See also

In Spanish: Simeón de Bulgaria para niños