Sakskoburggotski

СакскобургготскиPlace of birth BulgariaCurrent region BulgariaInformationFounder Simeon II of BulgariaPlace of origin BulgariaParent House Saxe-Coburg-GothaEstate Sofia, Bulgaria

Preslav, Bulgaria

Chicago, Obermittwest

The House of Sakskoburggotski (Bulgarian: Сакскобургготски) is the current ruling family of Bulgaria. Descended from the German House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, the name "Sakskoburggotski" is by all intents and purposes, the Bulgarianization of the German name Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, and was adopted by Simeon II, the former King of Bulgaria, in order to appease Bulgarian nationalists who felt deep resent against the monarchy in the aftermath of World War II.

Most of its members are Bulgarian Orthodox (with a Russian Orthodox faction formed from the marriage of Prince Todor and Princess Gabriela I from the Russian House of Bessolesky-Belozersky), and have long-abandoned the non-Orthodox faiths of their ancestors (namely Catholic and Lutheran), in addition are fully and fluently Bulgarian-speaking, the faction is truly considered a Bulgarian nobility with a founding patriarch, separate from the mainline Saxe-Coburg-Gotha proper.

During the Cold War, the Sakskoburggotskis were more-so figurehead rulers of Bulgaria, as the country's political and civil bodies became ruled by elected officials, however many princes and princesses were able to retain the important of the nobility by becoming deeply involved in economic, society, politics of the Bulgarian state.

From 1995 to 2010, the Sakskoburggotskis lived in Russia as exiles, and intermarried with Russian nobility, as did many nobilities of Eastern and Northern Europe. Prince Todor and his Russian wife, Princess Gabriela, would start a Russian line. Its current head of Cyril of Preslav, who became the King of Bulgaria in 2010, at the request of his father Simeon II.

The family contains high ties with other nobilities, namely the various nobilities of Russia, as well as the ruling Karađorđević dynasty in neighboring Serbia, as well as the nobilities of Finland.

History[]

Slavicization[]

In the past, the Bulgarian monarchy had consisted of non-Bulgarians and non-Slavs, let alone non-Orthodox. However, at the advise of Field Marshal Kolayanov, many Bulgarian princes began to marry Russian and Baltic German princesses, and vice versa. The leaders of the Russian Empire saw this as positive, as it would strengthen the alliance between Kingdom of Bulgaria and the Russian Empire.

In addition, a uniquely Bulgarian nobility, no longer confined to the laws of German nobility, the 1945 Royal Constitution declared that the Tsar of Bulgaria is to be Eastern Orthodox, Bulgarian in particular.

As a result, those Russian princesses who married Bulgarian princes became very powerful landowners in Bulgaria, despite traditionally having the princes inherit their properties, the princes pretty much allowed their Russian wives to control household decisions. Although their children inherited Bulgarian nationalities, and followed the Bulgarian Orthodox Church, retained their fluency in Russian, alongside Bulgarian.

Exile in Russia[]

In 1989, the Sakskoburggotskis were forced to abdicate all titles of nobility, yet, were able to continue living in Bulgaria by the new democratic government. However, Prince Kardam of Turnovo sensed the looming danger, and urged the family to re-locate to a country like Yugoslavia or Russia. Upon hearing of the Bulgarian situation, the Admiral of the Russian Navy, Prince Vladimir I Ungern-Sternberg offered to evacuate the Sakskoburggotskis out of Bulgaria, especially that the Sakskoburggotskis had ties to the nobilities of Russia via marriage, Vladimir also had nephews and nieces born from weddings between his sons and princesses of Bulgaria.

The situation in neighboring Yugoslavia had deteriorating to levels worst than Bulgaria, therefore Prince Kardam of Turnovo opted that the family leave with withdrawing Russian naval forces from the Black Sea.

Prince Kardam's suspicions were true, and in 1995, the Prime Minister Ivan Kostov ordered for the arrest of the Sakskoburggotskis, who by this point, had been evacuated to Crimea by the withdrawing Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Navy. The Prime Minister demanded that the Russians return the former nobility at once to face trial.

They family were given safe houses across Russia, normally those owned by the families of the Russian wives of the Bulgarian nobility, where they lived as exiles. The family were educated in Bulgarian overseas communities in Russia, who staunchly opposed the new government in their Bulgarian homeland.

Return to Kingship in Bulgaria 2011[]

A large monarchist movement in support of the Sakskoburggotskis emerged in Bulgaria, largely owing to the economic consequences of Bulgaria's pro-Western government. Sergey Plumenov and Nikolay Barekov would become the leaders of Bulgaria's monarchist nationalist movement.

As a constrast to the pro-German history of the Bulgarian monarchy, its supporters during the days of the republic were associated with Russophilia, and often-not, suspected of being Russian agents. In 2010, the Sakskoburggotskis got their long-awaited and hoped-for chance, just as they were beginning to lose hope, and having contemplations of becoming domiciled as Russian citizens, and beginning a new local nobility.

In 2011, a good majority of the Bulgarians welcomed the nobility, as well as their Russian allies. Simeon II, who had ruled as the Tsar-in-Exile, only ruled as the Tsar of Bulgaria for one year, before ultimately passing down rulership to his son Cyril I, former the Prince of Preslav. His son, Tassilo I, would inherit the throne as the Prince of Preslav.

His daughter, Princess Mafalda would be heavily involved in the Bulgarian arts, most of Bulgaria's arts institutions would be under her control.

Russian line (Besolesky-Belozersky-Sakskoburggotsky)[]

Prince Todor I, Prince Kardam's second-eldest, married Princess Gabriela I from the Russian House of Besolesky-Belozersky. However, Prince Todor married with the intention of starting a Russian line, having practically lost all hope for a return of the monarchy in Bulgaria.

Therefore, he became Prince Feodor (Russian: Князь Федор), but also known by Feodor the Bulgarian (Russian: Федор болгарин). In addition, Prince Feodor wanted to keep his wife's surname, and therefore, the two would use the legally-recognized surname Besolesky-Belozersky-Sakskoburggotsky to symbolize the combination of the two royal lineages.

Bulgarian Tsar-in-Exile Simeon II approved, and understood his grandson's wishes. Prince Feodor would go on to move in with his wife, in a palace owned by her father in Sevastopol.

When the House of Sakskoburggotskis were returned as the rulers of the re-surgent Kingdom of Bulgaria, Prince Feodor decided to stay in Russia and continue with his intentions of continuing the Russian line. He and wife still maintain regular contact with their relatives in Bulgaria.

Role in "liberal monarchism"[]

During their exile in Russia, the Sakskoburggotskis were known for championing liberal monarchism, introducing new ideas into nobilities not normally practiced before.