Welcome everyone, and thanks for tuning in — I’m Dave Liu, Co-Founder of Reel8. We share the stories of struggle and success behind the iconic creators responsible for the entertainment we love.

Today we’re joined by Evan Jackson Leong: the young, award-winning director and cinematographer known for great films like Snakehead (2021), Linsanity (2013), 1040 Christianity in the New Asia (2010), and The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006). If that’s not amazing enough, Evan also worked on Better Luck Tomorrow (2002), one of the great Asian American milestone films.

Evan is sixth generation Chinese-American and grew up in San Francisco, studying Asian American studies at UCLA. Welcome, Evan! It’s an honor to speak with you today.

It’s a pleasure.

Let’s talk a little bit about your filmmaking career. Becoming a filmmaker, frankly, isn’t a traditional path for many — and even more non-traditional for Asian Americans. I like to joke that there are some careers that can get you excommunicated from Asian American family; perhaps being a filmmaker is one of them…

But actually, you’ve stated publicly that your mom encouraged you to watch films and get involved in the creative process. Can you tell us a little bit about how you got started in the industry?

I grew up in a very safe environment, and I was lucky: my mother was very involved in exposing me to the arts, especially Asian arts and Asian American art. And there wasn’t that much of it back in the eighties and the nineties, but she always encouraged me to pursue whatever I felt passionate about. And she knew I was, somewhat of a… I like to draw a lot, and I was an artist… I liked to do those kinds of things. So, she would expose me to other people that were doing the same sort of arts as me. I think it wasn’t really until I went to UCLA, when I took this documentary class as a graduate film student and met Justin Lin, that I realized — there’s actually opportunity here.

These days, really any team can make a film with their phones. But back then, you know, really the only ways to get into the industry were a) you went to film school, or b) you had an aunt or uncle already in the industry. Things have changed quite a lot since then, but at the same time — they really haven’t. So for me — I had to take that step, make that leap of faith. And knowing that I had a supportive family background made it so much easier.

I come from a very privileged place, having been able to choose to focus upon the arts. But I think that, at the same time, things have changed. Now the opportunities are there for those who want to pursue them; distribution networks and the internet have unlocked so many possibilities.

I try to make it really clear to the young people who I mentor that it’s really important to find mentorship, sponsorship — someone to help you in your career and guide you.

You just mentioned Justin Lin — Justin is the very well-known director of franchises like the Fast and the Furious, who has found amazing success within the industry. Perhaps you can just tell us a little bit about what it was like to work with him in those early years, and then how that has shaped you as a filmmaker.

Those early years — I didn’t know what I was doing. I met this graduate film student who was like, “Hey, I’m making my movie. Can you shoot behind the scenes?”

And I was like: sure, I don’t know. I don’t know — I’ve never done this before.

I had never been on a film set before. He took me under his wing, and I just ate up everything. He told me everything, he taught me.

And this was someone who had spent about eight years in the film world at this point. He’d been through undergraduate and graduate film school. He already had a couple of films under his belt, so he knew what he was doing. So, I loved being around someone like that. Having a mentor is crucial.

These days, people have access to so much knowledge online that they forget that you can’t really get that experience, that advice from a mentor, in that format. you can learn everything technical that you possibly want to these days, and even story structure you can kind of learn. But there’s a certain level of feeling the emotion and passion for an industry that you can only get by having a mentor. Justin set the tone of what it meant to be a filmmaker for me. To this day, I still go by those rules he taught me in my early years.

Speaking of what you’ve learned through years of creating great films, could you give us a little bit of insight into the “sausage-making process” for you?

It always starts with an idea that is super interesting to me which then becomes a concept where I’m like, I need to learn more about this, and then: can I visualize this story? Can I find a way to tell this story that other people are gonna be interested in? Am I interested in it?

That’s usually the case with most of my projects; at the end of the day, if you’re not passionate — if you don’t care about the subject matter — then it’s gonna be a bad film. So you have to find passion in that storyline. What does it say about who you are? As a person, as an artist?

Making Snakehead was like that for almost ten years — I was still excited about it every single day. It never really went away. I knew that movie was something that I had to make.

Snakehead has an amazing story and message for the community — maybe you can speak a little bit about how that film came about. It sounds like you were working on it for quite some time, taking it from an idea in your mind to making it a reality.

When I heard of the woman in New York City’s Chinatown — Sister Ping and her story, that she smuggled hundreds of thousands of Chinese into America and had this connection to the underworld — I was fascinated by it. What really drew me to the story was that it featured a Chinese woman who seemed not to be stereotypical on any level. She was relatable to someone like me or you, who knows the Asian American community.

The way I look at feature films or any of these types of projects is: this is potentially your last project. You have to put that weight on it. If you’re gonna step up to the plate, the amount of resources, favors, and things it takes to make that film are huge challenges. If you don’t have that weight, you can easily not make it.

Snakehead was a story that I wanted to tell. I started writing the project in 2007 and we finished in 2017/18. You know, that’s ten years. Over ten years you change a lot as a man, as an artist… as a human being. There are remnants of my twenties in there. There are remnants of my thirties and, ultimately, my forties. I think that demonstrates what it takes, in terms of the artist’s journey. But I really love the process. I love the process of the pre-production. I love the production, I love post. What I’ve realized I enjoy the most is the process of making.

You’ve publicly stated that you had to go the indie route, crowdfunding at least some of the capital for that film. Can you tell us a little bit about why you decided to do that?

Yeah, we did that because we couldn’t raise the money. We couldn’t raise the money from private investment.

There was a moment where we had Lucy Liu tentatively attached to the film and it looked like we might raise the money –– but we ultimately spent about three years trying to raise the $4 million needed for production, and we didn’t get anywhere close to that kind of funding.

Ultimately, how were you able to get the Snakehead film sold and distributed?

After the film is shot, you have it edited and you show it around a little bit. You might get positive feedback — you get lots of feedback — but it really comes down to trying to have your project shown in a film festival.

A lot of film festivals turned us down. Then, out of nowhere, the Santa Barbara International Film Festival picked us up –– and that changed the course of the whole film. We were at a point where we had the finished film and just dozens of declines for festivals –– but getting to Santa Barbara was great. We had a nice home for this movie, a nice premiere — a world premiere, at a prestigious film festival.

Once we had secured the festival, we felt that we could get a buyer interested. So we worked with a sales agent, and all of a sudden we had a buyer and they were like: “we love this movie. We don’t want to change it. We like the way it is. We can sell this”.

Their support gave us the opportunity to really find this new crossover-audience which existed outside of our own communities and reach. So that was truly the moment in the movie when everything was — you know, it’s the dark night of the soul, and we get this nice little climax at the end. It was a very, very happy ending to a long, long journey.

Let’s switch gears a little bit to discuss one of your most iconic films: 2013’s Linsanity, released almost ten years ago. How did you get involved in that project and how did that story evolve?

I was friends with Chris Chan, a producer for Year of the Yao (2004), and he was like: “I’ve got your next project. There’s this kid at Harvard, he’s Asian American from the Bay Area, and he can dunk.”

I was in. So we started the process of shooting Jeremy at Harvard — just this unauthorized footage of him, you know, playing on a court at Harvard. We pursued this storyline because I thought that having an Asian American playing on the D1 level, and starting, and being exciting on the court — that was something that I had never seen before and had always wanted to see. If I were a young 12 or 13 year old and saw Jeremy play in the NBA, then I might believe that’s possible for me too.

What did you do to market and distribute the film? When Jeremy had blown up and Linsanity became a phenomenon, was it easy to get those multi-million dollar offers?

When Linsanity happened, it was like we’d suddenly become the hottest girl in school [laughs].

Everybody wanted to meet us, everybody wanted to talk to us. We held strong and made sure that we distributed the film the way that we wanted to, because we had already been working on it for two, three years. It was a point of pride that we were able to put the finishing touches on the film. We had the most amazing ending for a documentary, because we put in the time and work and took the right chances to get there.

Now that you’ve had almost ten years to reflect on Linsanity, what would you say has changed in your life? Did finishing the film send the message that you’d wanted to in creating this piece of work?

My life definitely changed after that. Artists are kind of always on a growth trajectory, but when a project blows up — like Linsanity — and you get the attention of the world, get that bigger audience, that’s when everyone starts looking at you differently. But you don’t change. It changes your life and what opportunities are presented to you — and then you hope to take advantage of those opportunities in the best way that you can.

For me, it’s been interesting to watch the world around me change while I focus on honing my art. That’s kind of what happened to Jeremy too — the world around him changed and he became a public figure, but he’s still the same guy who I met at Harvard as a twenty-year-old.

How would you reflect upon the challenges of being a person of color — an Asian American — within the film industry? How is the world that you built your career within different from that which you work in today?

When I reflect on this journey, I realize that it’s always been hard. It has never been easy. I think I just love what I do so much that it doesn’t matter, you know? If you really love something, you’ll find a way to get through it. Those feelings of struggling eventually give way to pride.

I’m happy that I’m still here struggling, and I think that’s what drives your inner artists and inner fire. But it took a long time to realize that is what this journey is. There’s no clocking in, clocking out; it’s just always hard. But when you’ve figured that out and learn to embrace it, it gets easier.

That’s the nature of this industry. I was just having a conversation about how Francis Ford Coppola funded his own movie, because no one wanted to finance it. This is Francis Ford Coppola, the guy that made The Godfather! You’d think that he could just do whatever he wants, but he can’t — we can’t — that’s not how it works.

Even at the highest level of success, these directors and filmmakers are still struggling. You have to know that it’s going to be hard; it’s always going to be a fight. Then you think: okay, that’s the way this industry works. This is just the arena that I’m playing in.

What guidance would you give to any young filmmaker of color today who is trying to be the next Evan Jackson Leong? How can they create their own content in this world?

What I’d tell them is: you have to figure out what your brand is. What kind of filmmaker are you? What kind of artist are you gonna be? What’s your mission, what is important to you? From there, you develop a sense of style and draft your own narrative of who you are.

If I look back at every movie I’ve made, they’re all stories about the underdog. We talked about Linsanity, Snakehead — both are stories of underdogs. As an Asian American, I know what it’s like to be an underdog in this country. And I embrace that; I love that. I love feeling that I’m not privileged for that opportunity. I love the fact that I had to find my own network, that I had to make my own art to get to where I am.