The Mountain West Conference baseball tournament will not be held next year, as the conference officials try to reduce costs, and Nevada baseball coach TJ Bruce is happy about that as he prefers not having a tournament.

The Mountain West board of directors concluded its virtual spring meeting Monday with several cost-cutting changes implemented.

Bruce said the regular-season should determine the champion and receive the automatic bid to the NCAA Tournament.

"No matter what's gone on we're all in it together and we're all going to have to absorb something," Bruce said of the cost-cutting measures.

Conference baseball and softball series will be reduced from three days to two (double-header and single game).

Mountain West baseball teams will play a 21-game regular-season schedule, down from the previous 30-games.

"Over a 10 or 11 week period, and you're the best team in the league, I thought that was enough to represent your league in the (NCAA) Tournament, not just being good for one weekend," Bruce said.

Eliminating the tournament is for one-year, for now, but could extend to future seasons.

Bruce said his feelings on it stem from his background in the Big West and Pac-12 conferences, which do not have tournaments to determine the NCAA Tournament representative.

The Pac-12 will start having tournaments next year.

Nevada won the league in 2018, but did not win the tournament.

Bruce said it is usually uncommon for the regular-season champion to also win the Mountain West tournament, although Fresno State did accomplish that in 2019.

"You play and you prepare your players to win the conference and you're gearing them towards that," Bruce said.

Mountain West meeting

In addition to eliminating the baseball tournament, there will not be men’s and women’s tennis and women’s soccer tournaments.

The board is comprised of the presidents from the 12 football-playing conference member institutions.

The Mountain West removed its indefinite suspension of in-person team athletic activities, which had been in place since March 26, due to the coronavirus outbreak.

The MW will allow voluntary in-person athletic workouts for all sports, beginning June 1. Each MW institution will have the discretion to make their determination according to state, local, NCAA and campus guidelines.

The board said cost-containment measures are necessary because of financial challenges created by the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent spring sports shutdown.

All measures are for the 2020-21 academic year.

"Evaluations will be ongoing to determine if revisions are necessary in real time and/or moving forward," the MWC stated in a news release.

Cost-containment measures include:

• Reduce conference office operating budget by 18 percent and diminish staff travel to regular-season contests, selected conventions and appropriate professional development seminars. Conference staff salaries will also be frozen and open positions will not be immediately filled.

• Freeze officiating fees in all sports.

• Move in-person coaches’ meetings and the conference’s 2020 spring and fall, and the 2021 spring meetings, to virtual events.

• Adjust in-person football and basketball media days to virtual events.

• Allow institutions to schedule second non-Division I opponent in men’s basketball (replacing an RPI of 250 or worse).

• Utilize a 16-match modified double-round robin schedule in women’s volleyball.

• Reduce conference baseball and softball series from three days to two (double-header and single game).

• Eliminate the baseball, men’s and women’s tennis and women’s soccer tournaments.

• Host swimming championship and diving championship at separate venues on MW campuses over three days.

• Reduce men’s and women’s indoor track & field and men’s and women’s golf tournaments from three days to two, and men’s and women’s outdoor track & field from four to three days.

MW commissioner Craig Thompson said the board worked with the athletic directors to try to protect opportunities for student-athletes.

"These unprecedented times demand creative solutions and great work has been done at the institutional level and collectively as a conference," Thompson said in a news release.