2024 MOUNTAIN WEST BASEBALL CHAMPIONSHIP

THE GAMES

Dates: May 23-26, 2024

Stadium: Tony Gwynn Stadium

FOLLOW ALONG

Watch Live: Mountain West Network

Live Stats: Stat Broadcast

Twitter (X): @FresnoStateBSB

San Diego, Calif. – The Fresno State baseball team is opening the Mountain West Baseball Championship at Tony Gwynn Field in San Diego California on Thursday, May 23 at 6 p.m. PT. The 'Dogs will rematch their regular season finale opponent Air Force in the opening round.

THE 'SHIP

The Mountain West Championship is a double-elimination tournament featuring the top four teams in the conference.

Air Force, the Regular Season MW Champion, is the top seed. They are followed by second-seeded New Mexico, third-seeded San Jose State and Fresno State with the fourth seed.

Fresno State was the fourth seed in 2023 as well, winning only one game in the tournament and getting bounced early.

The conference standings have been tight-knit, with the five teams battling for a tournament spot in the final week of the regular season.

This is Fresno State's seventh appearance in the MW Championship since joining the conference in 2013.

STAY CLASSY, SAN DIEGO

The Diamond 'Dogs are returning to Tony Gwynn Stadium to open the Mountain West Championship.

Fresno State is ready to bounce back from a tough trip to San Diego earlier this season when the Aztecs swept the Bulldogs in three games.

Tommy Hopfe leads the Bulldogs at the plate at Tony Gwynn Stadium this season with a .545 average with six hits and a double.

Aiden Cremarosa has a 0.00 ERA at Tony Gwynn Stadium after two scoreless innings.

Jake Riding punched out seven batters in five innings in his start on Sunday against the Aztecs

WE MEET AGAIN…

Fresno State will kick off the Mountain West Championship with a rematch against Air Force, who swept the Bulldogs on the road in the regular season finale.

The Bulldogs went 2-4 against the Falcons in 2024, winning the first series against them at home.

Grady Morgan crushed two home runs in the final series against the Falcons, one reaching a distance of 515 feet.

After 12.0 innings on the mound against the Falcons, Jake Dixon has a 1.50 ERA with only two earned runs against him, striking out 11 batters.

PUTTING THE "L" IN "LOBOS"

New Mexico earned the second seed in the Mountain West Championship and will open the tournament against San Jose State.

Fresno State faced New Mexico in only one series in 2024.

The Bulldogs won the series with wins in the first and second games.

Ben Newton led the Bulldogs at the plate in Albuquerque with a .545 average, adding three doubles to his season total.

Rocco Peppi hit two home runs at Santa Ana Star Field, with the first being launched 495 feet into left field.

Zach Statzer, Victor Arreola and Tommy Hopfe all have a 0.00 ERA against the Lobos after 4.2 combined scoreless innings.

NO WAY, JOSE

San Jose State is seeded third in the Mountain West Championship and is facing New Mexico in a rematch of their season finale.

Tyler Davis leads the charge at the plate against the Spartans with a .500 average, five hits, six RBI and a home run.

Rocco Peppi hit a pair of homers against the Spartans as well with five RBI.

Jayko Acosta and Zach Statzer each have a 0.00 ERA over San Jose State in 10.1 combined scoreless innings.

"Fresno State Athletics - Elevate: Imagine the Possibilities" - The Elevate Campaign provides a visionary roadmap to enhance and construct a series of athletic facilities to help further position Fresno State Athletics for sustained competitive success nationally, while also further serving as a source of pride and economic growth throughout California's Central Valley. For more information, visit GoBulldogs.com/elevate.