Jeff Sackman tosses The Book on his desk and it lands with a thud.

The Book is nothing to look at -- a two-inch stack of photocopied pages held together by a plastic coil -- but the head of Toronto-based movie distributor ThinkFilm brandishes it like a preacher does a Bible. And with good reason: Over the next week or so, Sackman and his company will be putting a lot of faith in The Book.

It is a compilation of every movie that has arrived at this year's Toronto International Film Festival without a distributor. As the glitzy fest got under way and red carpets were unfurled in downtown Toronto, ThinkFilm's buyers packed themselves into a windowless conference room, cramming through the pages to determine what they will see, and what they may bid on.

It's a scene playing out in offices and hotel rooms all over town.

"We cull it down to an A-list, a B-list and a C-list, in order of what we believe are the most desirable," Sackman says. "Presumably everybody's doing the same."

Down the hall from Sackman's office, the debate is in full swing. Voices are raised, arguments are won and lost, and the stakes are high. Behind the parade of Hollywood stars that will grace the city in the coming days -- from Brad Pitt to Russell Crowe and Reese Witherspoon -- film distributors are the unseen power brokers who drive the festival machine. At once they can make or break a movie, or have their own fortunes lifted or dashed depending on what they buy.

The distributors are the delivery system of the industry, buying the films they think will make money, and getting them into theatres around the world.

ThinkFilm, one of dozens of players back in the buying game this year, has scored financial hits in the past with documentaries such as Spellbound and The Aristocrats, but has seen other sure-shot titles choke in theatres, making the job of its buyers that much tougher.

"We're dealing in a subjective medium," Sackman explains.

"People say this film is good or that film is bad," Sackman said. "Let's simplify the definition of a good film: It's good when it's profitable. Subjectivity we can leave for the film classes."

Sackman is a shrewd, seasoned distributor, but he and his independent outfit, with offices in Toronto and New York, are admittedly small potatoes compared with the cast of industry heavyweights that have descended on Toronto this week.

The notables include Harvey Weinstein, the bombastic former head of Miramax, who left to start his own distributor; Fox Searchlight's Peter Rice; Focus Features' James Schamus; the Sony Classics duo of Michael Barker and Tom Bernard; and Jon Feltheimer of Lions Gate, the distributor that straddles Vancouver and Los Angeles. Also on the list are New Line's Michael Lynne; Picturehouse's Bob Berney; and newcomer Paramount Vantage, headed by president John Lesher.

Sackman chuckles at the star power some distributors bring to the industry event. "Harvey Weinstein is a celebrity," he says. "Jeff Sackman is not a celebrity."

To insiders, those half-dozen power players are the real show this week. The elite have swooped into town with large entourages in tow that will spend upwards of 12 hours a day screening movies, deciding which ones to go after. The wheeling and dealing in Toronto has a reputation for being less formal than at Cannes and even Sundance. But the talks are no less onerous, held behind hotel-room doors, in bars and fine restaurants, and often lasting into the wee hours.

"Negotiations up here can be relaxed and casual, but they can also be incredibly intense," says Jared Moshé, a partner at New York-based Sidetrack Films, which is bringing the much-anticipated autobiographical documentary, Kurt Cobain: About a Son, to Toronto to find a distributor. "The strategy involves targeting the buyers who you know will respond to the film."

There is a pecking order among distributors that is not unlike that of the stars themselves. Bigger trailers are substituted for private screenings and priority access.

Weinstein's new company is being treated in deal-making circles not unlike the triumphal return of a big-name actor. Weinstein was at the peak of his power as head of Miramax, which he co-founded with brother Bob Weinstein in 1979. But the pair left Disney-owned Miramax in 2005 and are now trying to rebuild their empire as the almighty distributor. He has already locked up several titles that are garnering a lot of buzz, including Emilio Estevez's political film, Bobby, about the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy, and the documentary Dixie Chicks: Shut Up and Sing, about the controversy surrounding the band's criticism of the Bush presidency.

Tempestuous and ruthless, the Weinsteins are among the most savvy distributors and producers. It wasn't long after starting the new company that the pair scored with TransAmerica, a fringe movie that soon became a mainstream name at the Oscars. As one Toronto producer puts it, Harvey Weinstein is a "force of nature . . . when he decides to throw himself behind a picture, there's no one better."

In the otherwise posh world of the festival, Weinstein once walked into a Toronto screening with two assistants toting two-litre Coke bottles for their boss's movie-viewing tastes. "Harvey is what he is, and he's unique in that," said the Toronto producer.

But the landscape is shifting.

Rice (Fox Searchlight), Schamus (Focus), and Feltheimer (Lions Gate) all come to town with wallets as big as (or bigger than) Weinstein's. All will likely be in the room, or on the phone, should a bidding war break out.

Feltheimer holds buying sway at any festival, but his clout has magnified in recent months after Lions Gate rode Crash to best film at the Oscars this year. Movie fans may not have noticed, but when director / writer Paul Haggis, a native of London, Ont., and producer Cathy Schulman took to the podium to accept the honour, Feltheimer was the first individual thanked. Distributor first -- then husbands, wives and families.

Among the movies seeking distributors in Toronto that have the most buzz are Jennifer Lopez's and hubby Marc Anthony's new film El Cantante, and The Hottest State from Mark Webber and Ethan Hawke. Vince Vaughn's Wild West Comedy Show: 30 Days & 30 Nigh ts -- Hollywood to the Heartland is also drawing attention.

Weinstein has already grabbed the worldwide rights to Michael Moore's next doc, on health care and called Sicko, (his company financed it), which has drawn considerable buzz.

Smaller players like ThinkFilm sit those ones out.

"It's pretty obvious when there's an English-language, star-driven film, that's going to be of interest to all the players," Sackman says. "Sometimes it's best for us to wait until after the festival is over and see what's around."

Not surprisingly, the distributors are given preferred access to the dozens of daily showings around town. In certain cases, private screenings are arranged.

But status doesn't mean seats are guaranteed. Last year, Sackman had to smooth-talk his way past a long lineup of moviegoers when he was late for a film the company was interested in seeing. But the efforts proved all for naught. Another lesson of festival buying: You never know what the movie is like until you sit in the theatre. "We ended up walking out after 45 minutes," Sackman recalls.

In cases where films have already shown at other festivals, scouts are often sent to prescreen the movie in New York, Los Angeles or London. Most likely the script has already been read as well.

"If they like a film, they set about doing a deal instantaneously," says one distributor. "A sales agent is usually waiting right outside the theatre. Everybody knows where the seller is."

Then a game of cat and mouse ensues. "The trick is to try to monopolize the agent, lock the hotel-room door, and don't let anyone else in," says one distributor. There are no handshake agreements, but a napkin deal does pass muster.

"It's cutthroat," the distributor says. "They make sure whatever is written on that napkin can be turned into a long-form agreement. They negotiate everything from [prints and advertising]to reps and warranties, insurance, clearances, and what cast members will be available for publicity."

Last year, the highly touted Thank You for Smoking drew two bidders, both of whom thought they'd acquired the film. The double deal, which eventually went to Fox Searchlight, has gone down in film-fest lore as an example of the no-holds-barred bargaining that can happen.

"It's a real war. One team is in one room. One in another. And the sales agent hops back and forth," says the distributor. "It's madness."

While Weinstein is on the comeback trail, Feltheimer is still riding high from the Oscars, and Rice and Schamus bring fat wallets to the table, several distributors have come to the festival with storm clouds overhead. Alliance Atlantis has been embroiled in a messy legal standoff with the former head of its film-distribution arm, Victor Loewy.

An Ontario court placed a temporary injunction on Loewy two weeks ago, preventing him from competing with Alliance Atlantis in the distribution game until an arbitrator decides whether he quit or was fired in the wake of a boardroom argument in July. Loewy is known in the industry for his connections and deal-making skills, but the court injunction leaves him on a tight leash in Toronto.

Sackman, meanwhile, had a falling out with fellow ThinkFilm stakeholder Robert Lantos, of Serendipity Point Films. Sackman is rumoured to be looking for someone to buy the company, and is said to be courting U.S. investor David Bergstein. In a subsequent conversation, Sackman would not comment on the potential sale.

An unexpected gust of uncertainty has also blown through mid-sized player Paramount Vantage, which is making its first appearance in Toronto after the Hollywood giant revamped its distribution operations. However, the sudden firing this week of Tom Freston, who was CEO of parent company Viacom, has sparked talk in Hollywood of a more extensive upheaval at Paramount. Although that's unlikely to disrupt negotiations, it's a topic the company will likely have to address with film companies.

Back at ThinkFilm's offices, the five-year-old company -- started by former Lions Gate executives, including Sackman -- isn't worried about being overtaken by the money thrown around this year in Toronto. Last year, the festival saw a record $30-million (U.S.) worth of deals. One of the most sought-after films at last year's fest was the romantic comedy Trust the Man, starring David Duchovny and Julianne Moore. In theatres now, it has so far disappointed at the box office.

"There's virtually no correlation between what one pays for a film and what the film ultimately does," Sackman says. "If your film outgrosses, it doesn't matter that they are Fox or Paramount or Warner Bros. The public decides." That may be, but in the meantime, it's a handful of powerful distributors who decide what the public will decide on.