Johan Vilhelm Aubert (7 June 1922 – 19 July 1988) was an influential Norwegian sociologist. He was a professor at the Faculty of Law, University of Oslo from 1963 to 1971 and at the Department of Sociology from 1971 to 1988. He co-founded the Norwegian Institute for Social Research already in 1950, and has been labelled the "father of Norwegian sociology". In his early life he was a member of the anti-Nazi resistance group XU, and while later involved on the radical wing of the Labour Party, he edited the newspaper Orientering.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Vilhelm Aubert has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Passionate, Intense, Charming, Intelligent, Intuitive, Trustworthy, and Physical.

Charming and Quick-witted

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Vilhelm Aubert is someone who is a charming, quick-witted, and energetic person who combines passion and intelligence with an ability to feel what others are feeling and to effectively communicate with them. A person who looks for jobs that tend to reflect their identity.

Passionate and Intense

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Vilhelm Aubert well know them as someone who can be passionate, proud, and intense, like the sun or a blazing fire.

Productive and Perseverent

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Vilhelm Aubert as someone who is productive, persevering, deliberate, and direct.

A person who is creative, has good luck with work and money, good listening skills, good relationships with people at work, is a good teacher or counselor, and who is good at organizing groups, teams, or causes.

Justice-seeking and Insightful

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Vilhelm Aubert is someone who tends to be intolerant of unfairness in life, and who has an uncanny ability to reveal the truth in any situation.

They are also someone who is balanced, stable, and energetic, who likes the idea of home and family, and who is very comfortable being the person in charge.

Logical and Reasonable

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Vilhelm Aubert tends to be someone who is understanding, logical, and reasonable. Who can be intellectual and intuitive, speak the truth at any cost, be witty and sociable, and live life to its fullest.

Some of Vilhelm Aubert's challenges

While Vilhelm Aubert has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Vilhelm Aubert can be Stubborn, Hypocritical, Self-centered, Complicated, Brusque, Idle, and Possessive.

Hypocritical and Self-centered

One of Vilhelm Aubert's key challenges is that they are someone who can be perceived as hypocritical and self-centered.

Vilhelm Aubert must also exercise caution as they can be short-tempered and aggressive.

Possessive and Stubborn

Vilhelm Aubert is someone who can be possessive, jealous, inflexible, and stubborn, can have a habit of being a frivolous spender, and who can feel insecure or cynical in romantic relationships and have difficulty forming productive personal and professional partnerships.

Indecisive and Distracted

Finally, Vilhelm Aubert also can have a hard time staying focused and can easily become restless.