The Perfect American, first seen in Madrid earlier this year and now receiving its UK premiere at English National Opera, takes place in the last three months of Walt Disney's life. The narrative moves back and forth, from present despair to apple-pie memories of childhood and locomotives in small-town Missouri. He knows he is dying. His workers, nameless animators working like slaves, haunt his waking hours. The myth is crumbling around the great colossus.

Shuffling around in pyjamas and dressing gown, hooked up to a drip, the man who created the still proliferating American dream hardly looks the perfect anything. This is the standard trope of the dying husk of genius. The pathos promises to be sharp and uneasy. Philip Glass's latest opera, however, gives us the husk but does not deliver the genius.

The temptation is to measure known facts about Disney's life with the imaginative interpretation Glass presents in the opera, based on an unflattering fictional account by Peter Stephan Jungk. The libretto is by Rudy Wurlitzer. As Disney tells an awestruck child, it would take him months of working day and night to bring movement and life to one character in a cartoon. He had no choice but to call on others to make it happen.

The repetitive nature of making cartoons, a natural world for musical minimalism to evoke, is suggested via cinema projectors (with their pairs of reels echoing Mickey Mouse's ears), which provide the main feature of the design. Animated lay figures, as if out of a "how to draw" book, skip and jump and ingeniously draw themselves. These are replicated by a choreographed band of draughtsmen, whose somewhat fussy charade of the industrial production of art compensates for a degree of inertia in the words and music.

Andy Warhol – who invented the great counter American dream and created his own famous factory of art – makes an appearance, in an old-fashioned camp cameo of a type to amuse tired minds that a tighter libretto would have forestalled. Large Warhol-esque images of Disney are on display and two artists are belittled for the price of one.

On this same ENO stage, again created by the clever team of director Phelim McDermott and Improbable, Satyagraha brought quietism to life. But here artistic energy is merely parodied. Much is made of the fact that Disney is not, after all, cryogenically frozen but was cremated. Glass makes a special little rising arpeggio to animate this grave truth. "I am the man who pressed the button," sings an undertaker, reminding us of the American way of death.

Yet this operatically portrayed Disney is granted little in the way of charm or talent. There is no indication that he possessed any kind of magic, despite Christopher Purves's inspired performance in the title role. One line of the text, to paraphrase, criticises Disney for being no artist but merely a greedy CEO. Platitudes stolidly trickle out of Wurlitzer's libretto. No wonder Glass's music takes a while to get going. The pace is slack until the much improved second half. The "arioso" singing meanders and wanders.

The orchestral variety is impressive, especially in the percussion writing. The dry castanet sound at the start and menacing drum rolls at the end create an unfamiliar effect. Two grand choruses make you long for more. Both orchestra and chorus, under the baton of Gareth Jones, are on strong form. Janis Kelly, ever intelligent as the nurse, holds the stage. David Soar as Walt's brother Roy is broadly commonsensical. As a Disney employee, disgruntled yet still fond and respectful, Donald Kaasch is the most interesting figure.

Interviewed in the Guardian, McDermott revealed the muddle at the heart of this work: "And within it is the discussion of whether [Disney] was an artist. He wasn't actually that good at drawing. When he gave public talks and demonstrations, he had to be given lines to help him draw Mickey Mouse." Disney was not trying to be Rolf Harris. McDermott, and Glass and Wurlitzer too, have fallen into the trap of believing two statements that have more to do with performance than drawing.

The vast production that goes under Disney's name hides the fact that he was a brilliant, highly skilled miniaturist who invented an entire new visual language. To base an opera on the fallacy that he wasn't very good at drawing is rather like basing an oratorio on the life of Henry Ford – a figure of comparable dullness of the kind which genius can often inhabit – by saying he wasn't much good at making cars.