Fast-forward your retail brand with Unified Commerce cloud technology

Join Microsoft and LS Retail for a short seminar about the future of retail and unified commerce, focusing specifically on LS Retail and Microsoft cloud software solutions.

We welcome all retailers, hospitality companies, customers and partners to this half day of presentations and discussions followed by lunch.

Customers have the chance to book one-to-one meetings with the LS Retail team, directly via email after submitting their registration.

Date and location:

26 March 2020 starting at 09:00 am at Microsoft Oy: Keilalahdentie 2-4, 02150 Espoo | See it on Google Maps

28 May 2020 starting at 09:30 am at Microsoft Iberica: Paseo del Club Deportivo, 1 - Centro Empresarial La Finca - Edificio 1 - 28223 Pozuelo de Alarcón (Madrid) | See it on Google Maps

In light of the ongoing global developments regarding the COVID-19 epidemic and increasing health concerns, we have made the decision to cancel our event Unified Commerce Cloud Tour that was going to take place in Espoo, Finland on March 26, 2020.

We are placing the well-being of our customers, employees and our partners as our number one priority. We will be reaching out to each person that has registered, to schedule a follow up meeting and discussions.

24 June 2020 starting at 09:00 am at Microsoft Sweden: Regeringsgatan 25, 111 53 Stockholm. Room MPR1 + MPR2 | See it on Google Maps

Tickets:

Participation is free, but please register now as seats are limited.

The event is open to retailers, restaurateurs, hoteliers as well as LS Retail partners and tech companies interested in becoming partners.

Topics:

What is Unified Commerce and why is it important for your retail business?

What is new and exciting about LS Central and Microsoft Dynamics 365 Business Central?

SaaS – Unified commerce in action (Head office, back office, POS, mobile, eCommerce, apps)

Lunch and discussions

If you have any questions, don't hesitate to contact us.

Would you like to book a meeting with the LS Retail team?