The Dutch sports club PSV Eindhoven is all set to upgrade its home ground – the Philips Stadium in Eindhoven, Netherlands.

‘psv.nl’ stated that the upper ring on the North side of the Philips Stadium will be upgraded. The outer area of the ring will be closed off, the catering space will be equipped with premium facilities and more restrooms will be built.

The PSV hopes to start the upgrade works next season.

The PSV Eindhoven is a Dutch sports club from Eindhoven, Netherlands. It is best known for its professional football team which has played in the Eredivisie, the top tier of Dutch football, since its inception in the year 1956. The Philips Stadium serves as its home field.

The Philips Stadium is a football stadium in Eindhoven, Netherlands. As the home of the PSV Eindhoven, it is, therefore, also known as the PSV Stadium. With a capacity to hold 36,500 spectators, it is the third-largest football stadium in Netherlands.

‘psv.nl’ further stated that the Philips Stadium Director Sjors van den Boogaart informed that the upgrade work of the stadium was planned long back – “We will begin upgrade work on the upper ring on the North side of the venue. Since the outer area of the ring is partially open it remains exposed to the weather elements. We plan to close off the outer ring area to protect it from the weather elements. We will take pages out from the renovation work done on the facility in the year 1970.”

In 1970, the Philips Stadium was renovated and extended, and had four stands installed. The stadium was able to attract crowds of around 25,000 for the matches.

The top official concluded, “The PSV is planning to upgrade the existing washrooms and build more bathrooms. The catering areas will also be spruced up to ensure that people do not have to wait for hours in serpentine queues. We are still holding discussions with the Municipality officials on when to start the stadium spruce-up work and hope to kick off the same from the next season.”

Continue to follow Coliseum for latest updates on venues business news. Coliseum is dedicated towards building the best global community of sports and entertainment venue executives and professionals creating better and more profitable venues.

Become a member of the only Global Sports Venue Alliance and connect with stadiums, arenas and experts from around the world. Apply for membership at coliseum-online.com/alliance and make use of the 365Coliseum Business.

« Previous News: Perth venues’ naming rights for the asking

» Next News: