The Carter Center

“I have one life and one chance to make it count for something... My faith demands that I do whatever I can, wherever I am, whenever I can, for as long as I can with whatever I have to try to make a difference.” — ​Jimmy Carter

The Carter Center is a nongovernmental, not-for-profit organization founded in 1982 by former U.S. President Jimmy Carter. He and his wife Rosalynn Carter partnered with Emory University just after his defeat in the 1980 U.S. Presidential elections. The center is located in a shared building adjacent to the Jimmy Carter Library and Museum on 37 acres of parkland two miles from downtown Atlanta. The library and museum are owned and operated by the United States National Archives and Records Administration, while the Center is governed by a Board of Trustees, consisting of business leaders, educators, former government officials, and philanthropists.

​This video shows an overview of the Carter Center's efforts to advance human rights and alleviate unnecessary human suffering in over 80 countries. At work in many of the poorest regions in the world, The Carter Center brings hope to those who need it most.

Carter Center Grounds

​​Located in a wooded 35-acre park just five minutes from downtown Atlanta, The Carter Center's spectacular grounds include formal gardens, sculptures and waterfalls tucked between two small lakes. The map below shows the location of ten "must-see" features that make this landmark so special. You can easily spend an hour exploring these grounds and it will be worth every minute!

Carter Center Grounds Map (click on image to download)

​​​MAP LEGEND

Circle of Flags — The U.S. flag is the centerpiece of a stirring display of the flags of our 50 states. Seasonal color highlights the circle.

Entry Gardens — The terraced overlook to the Jimmy Carter Library is bordered by colorful beds and an engaging fountain. Plants of interest include star magnolias, Japanese maples, Foster’s hollies, and leather leaf mahonia.

Rose Garden — Our serene rose garden is home to more than 40 varieties, including the coral Rosalynn Carter, pink Queen Elizabeth, red and white Snow Fire, red Rotary, pink and yellow Peace, lavender Lady X, and Blue Girl. The garden centerpiece is the engaging statue, “Hope,” donated by Dorothy C. Fuqua.

“Sightless Among Miracles” — This striking sculpture, donated by John and Rebecca Moores, depicts a child leading a blind man, a sight often seen in countries whose populations are vulnerable to river blindness disease. The Carter Center has led efforts to control, or eliminate, this disease.

Japanese Garden — Designed by Japanese Master Gardener Kinsaku Nakane and donated by the YKK Corporation, the garden contains many species of azaleas, rhododendrons, Japanese maples, river birch, golden raintree, camellia, and barberry. The large waterfall represents former President Jimmy Carter and the small waterfall Rosalynn Carter.

Native Oak Forest — Consisting of three acres, this is an undisturbed natural area on our property. It offers interesting views of our Japanese Garden across the lower lake. This area is home to our American chestnut tree demonstration site. Picnic tables provide a relaxing outdoor eating place for visitors.

Pollinator Garden — Established in 2014 and part of the Rosalynn Carter Butterfly Trail, the pollinator garden is filled with native flowers and plants. The garden features milkweed, which monarch butterflies need to complete their life cycle, and other plants that can host Georgia’s state butterfly, the tiger swallowtail. An array of nectar plants appeals to other pollinators, particularly bees, wasps, and birds.

Sundial — Several seasonal color beds enhance the circle in front of the Ivan Allen III Pavilion. This area provides a beautiful panoramic view of the Atlanta skyline. Employees of the Ivan Allen Company donated the sundial in memory of Mr. Allen.

Koi Pond — The intriguing koi pond honors Senator Hajime Akiyama and his family as early supporters of The Carter Center and acknowledges the abiding friendship between President and Mrs. Carter and the citizens of Japan.

Caribou Statue — The caribou statue was presented to The Carter Center to commemorate the 20th anniversary of President Carter’s signing of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act.