Nelly Furtado is a Canadian music artist born in Victoria British Columbia December 2 of 1978.Furtado is of Portuguese descent and grew up in a very musical family. Her father was a fan of Portuguese music while her mother was a church choir singer.

She played numerous instruments growing up and liked to sing and dance. At the age of eight years, old Furtado received her first tape recorder and microphone. With that and her love for Hip Hop and artists she had listened to such as, TLC, Ice-T and Mariah Carry helped her experiment with sampling techniques

At 18 years old Furtado entered a talent show that was held in Toronto called the Honey Jam. Her performance managed to catch the eye of a funk/pop group called the philosopher kings. She then ended up recording a track with the group. After a few more tracks she ended signing a record contract with DreamWorks records starting her debut album Whoa Nelly.

Nelly Furtado’s first Album contained these songs:

1. Hey, Man! 4:10

2. Shit on the Radio 3:54

3. Baby Girl 3:35

4. Legend 3:35

5. I’m Like a Bird

6. Turn Off the Light 4:36

7. Trynna Finda Way 3:34

8. Party 4:03

9. Well, Well 3:01

10. My Love Grows Deeper, Part 1 4:23

11. I Will Make U Cry 4:00

12. Scared of you 6:10

Nelly Furtado’s Albums:

1. (2000) Whoa Nelly

2. (2003) Folklore

3. (2004) AOL Sessions

4. (2006) Loose

5. (2006) Promiscuous (remixes)

6. (2006) Live Session EP

7. (2007) Loose: The Concert

8. (2009) Mi Plan

9. (2010) Mi Plan remixes

10. (2010) The best of Nelly Furtado

11. (2012) The Spirit Indestructible

12. (2017) The ride

Nelly Furtado won the Grammy Awards in 2002 for best female pop vocal performance and recording academy for “I’m Like A Bird,”.

Growing up Nelly Furtado was my favorite singer. I loved her voice, I loved her music and I just loved how different she was. But my favorite part about Furtado was that she’s a Canadian-born singer. Furtado was also popular for the fact that she mixed her Portuguese heritage into her music. She mixed pop and rock styles with the music style of her families. Even David Browne of Entertainment weekly had said to have praised Furtado’s energy and the different mixtures of music.

In 2001 Furtado went touring in the U.S during the spring and had opened for the Electronica Artist Moby. Another popular song that became a huge hit by singing on Missy Elliott’s remix song “Get Ur Freak On.”

The Album “Folklore” is the second album released and it was released on November 23rd. The album was said to have not matched the previous album’s popularity in certain countries but came up popular in European Countries. The Album was to recognize Furtado’s families immigration to Canada. A known fact Furtado said that the mellowness sound in the album was due to the fact that she was pregnant during the recording. “When I look at my old photo albums, I see pictures of their brand-new house, their shiny new car, their first experiences going to very North American-type places like Kmart. When you have that in your blood, you never really part of it – it becomes your own personal folklore.” (Interview Quote from Furtado In 2006.)

Furtado had won the Cyprus music awards in 2012 as the Best Canadian Artist. In 2016 she had also won the Allan Slaight Humanitarian Spirit award given by the Canadian Music and Broadcast Industry Awards. In 2001 Furtado’s single “I’m like a Bird: was nominated for the Juno awards and won.

Furtado was nominated and won the Best New Solo Artist, Best Songwriter and Best recording engineer. What was said to be an addicting and popular song in 2007 was the hit, “All Good Things (Come to an End)”. The hit also was nominated for the MTV Europe Music awards for the Most Addictive Track. The MTV Europe Music Awards celebrate the popular music videos. Furtado has been pretty popular in the European countries. The Album “Loose” was nominated and won Album of The Year from, the MTV Europe Music Awards as well.

In the process of working together with Last Gang Labels. Nelly Furtado founded her first record company called, “Nelstar Entertainment Inc.” in 2009. Last Gang Label is a Canadian independent group. Furtado is also the first Portuguese- Canadian who had won a Latin Grammy award. In March 2007 Furtado returned to her hometown in Victoria, British Columbia to perform a concert at the Save-On-Foods Memorial Centre.

Nelly Furtado also sang the Canadian Anthem in 2016 at an NBA game in the Air Canada Center and didn’t get the best results. NBA fans have said they she had wrecked the anthem and called her “Tone Deaf”. A lot of the comments were sticking up for her calling her a “National Treasure.” I think Nelly Furtado is very Canadian and also respectful towards her heritage in bringing both of them together creating music that everyone ended up loving. Furtado has made lots of a difference in Canada as well as outside of Canada on tours.