This page is similar in name or subject to other pages.

See also Jenny Jones (disambiguation) for a complete list of references to clarify differences between these closely named or closely related articles.

Jenny Jones Jenny Jones Aliases: Morgan's wife Series: The Walking Dead Gender: Female Notability: Minor character Race: Zombie Location: King County, Georgia Relatives: Morgan Jones (husband)

Duane Jones (son) Status: Deceased Died: 2010 First: "Days Gone Bye" Final: "Days Gone Bye" Actor: Keisha Tillis

Jenny Jones is a minor character featured in the AMC television series The Walking Dead. She was featured in the pilot episode, "Days Gone Bye" and was played by actress Keisha Tillis.

Biography[]

Jenny Jones was the wife of Morgan Jones and the mother of Duane Jones. She lived in Georgia and was one of the earliest to fall victim to the zombie outbreak that swept across the country. Like many "walkers", Jenny had an instinctual connection to things that seemed familiar to her. She accompanied a horde of zombies that meandered about a house where her husband and son had taken refuge in. At one point, she even tried opening the front door, but it was locked.

Morgan could not bear to see his wife wandering about as an undead creature and the effect it had on their son was even worse. Tearfully, Morgan did what needed to be done however. Taking up a high-powered rifle, he tried to put Jenny's soul to rest, but was unable to bring himself to do it.

Sometime later, Morgan encountered Jenny again, but was powerless to stop her from attacking Duane and turning him into a walker. This time, Morgan had little choice but to finish her off.

Notes & Trivia[]

The character of Jenny Jones was created by writer Robert Kirkman and director/producer Frank Darabont.

In the closing credits of "Days Gone Bye", the character is identified only as Morgan's wife.

See also[]

The Walking Dead

The Walking Dead images

The Walking Dead episodes

The Walking Dead characters

The Walking Dead cast & crew

The Walking Dead miscellaneous

[]