This article is about the TV Universe character. You may be looking for her Comic Series counterpart. For other pages with the same name, see: Jenny

“

She died in the other room on that bed. There was nothing I could do about it. That fever man... skin gave off a heat like a furnace. I should've put her down man, I should've put her down, I know that but I... You know I just didn't have it in me. She's the mother of my child.

―Morgan explaining how Jenny died to Rick Grimes.[src]

”

Jenny Jones (née unknown) is a survivor of the outbreak in AMC's The Walking Dead. She is the wife of Morgan and the mother of Duane. During the initial outbreak, she is bitten and succumbs to the infection, reanimating, and forcing Morgan and Duane to seek refuge in King County, Georgia.

Pre-Apocalypse[]

North Carolina[]

Nothing is known about Jenny's life prior to or as the outbreak began, except that she grew up in North Carolina and met her husband in Raleigh.

Macon, Georgia[]

At some point, they became married and together they had a son named Duane. The trio lived together as a typical family and they would go on several family trips.

Post-Apocalypse[]

King County[]

During the onset of the outbreak, Jenny and her family evacuated from their home, upon where they witnessed several broadcasts informing other survivors to travel towards a supposed safe-zone in Atlanta. However, due to the chaos and horrendous events which transpired around them, the family was reluctantly forced to take refuge and heavily barricade themselves within a nearby house.

At some point, Jenny was bitten and succumbed to the infection. Morgan was unable to put her down and released her into the outside to roam the streets for the following months.

TV Series[]

Season 1[]

King County, Georgia[]

As her husband was unable to put her down, Jenny continued to wander around King County in a zombified state for some time after and would often return to the house where she had died at night.

One day, while Morgan and Duane were scavenging in an abandoned house, Jenny followed them inside, presumably through the front door which Morgan had left ajar by accident. Jenny attacked Duane who was unable to bring himself to shoot his own mother. Upon finding this, Morgan was finally able to shoot Jenny in the head, but it was too late for Duane who died of his mother's attack and later reanimated himself. The loss of Jenny and Duane drove Morgan insane and he would leave Jenny's corpse in the house where Duane had died while chaining a zombified Duane up in the house where they had been living. Morgan would subsequently block out the memory of his return for Duane, believing that he had fled and never come back after losing his son.

Season 7[]

Fear the Walking Dead[]

Season 8[]

Content

"King County"

Over a decade after first leaving King County, Morgan returns to put a zombified Duane down. Morgan tells Grace and Mo the story of Duane's death at Jenny's hands and he admits that, after finally putting Jenny down, he ran and left Duane behind to turn. After entering the house with Grace, Dwight, Sherry, Oriole and a PADRE guard, Morgan finds Jenny's skeleton and tearfully covers her body with a sheet.

While trying to use the gun that Rick Grimes had given to him on walkers, Morgan repeatedly hallucinates them as a zombified Jenny. Morgan is finally able to fight past his hallucinations of Jenny and shoot the walkers. In the attic of the house where he had lived with Duane after Jenny had died, Morgan finds his zombified son chained up. With Mo's life in danger, Morgan is finally able to use the gun that Rick had given him over a decade before to use on Jenny to put Duane to rest at last.

The next morning, Morgan buries Jenny and Duane outside of the burned down house. Morgan promises his family that he will come back to see them again some day and that it won't take a decade this time. In the wreckage, Mo finds Morgan's family photo album with pictures of Jenny and Duane which will help Morgan to remember his family as they were when they were still alive.

"All I See Is Red"

Jenny is one of the people whose loss continues to haunt Morgan, appearing in red-tinged flashes of her death to Morgan.

Later, Morgan touches a kiss to Grace's grave and he has flashes of Eastman, Benjamin, Nick Clark, Isaac, Rachel, John Dorie, John Dorie Sr., Alicia Clark, Jenny, Duane and Grace, all of the people that he's cared about and lost along the way. This time, Morgan only sees fond memories of his loved ones without the red-tinge, at peace at last with those that he's lost.

Death[]

Killed By

Zombies (Alive)

Infection (Alive)

During her family's evacuation to head towards Atlanta, Jenny gets bitten on the chest by a walker. Not being able to travel, she and her family stay in their house until she can feel better, but she succumbs to the infection and reanimates.

Morgan Jones (Zombified)

After a zombified Jenny bites Duane, Morgan finally makes the decision to shoot and put her down.

Killed Victims[]

This list shows the victims Jenny has killed:

Duane Jones (Infected, Alive)

Possibly a few zombies

Possibly a few unnamed people (Infected)

Relationships[]

Allies[]

Morgan Jones - Husband

Duane Jones † - Son

Appearances[]

Trivia[]

Jenny is credited as Morgan's Wife in "Days Gone Bye".

She is the first Jones family to die of infection and reanimate and die.

Jenny and Duane are mentioned by Morgan in "Alaska" as he chats with Rachel about staying healthy as a new mother. He mentions that Jenny had trouble keeping on weight to feed Duane, no matter how much Chinese food takeout Morgan brought home for them to eat.

On the walls of Morgan's Houseboat in "Remember What They Took From You" is written "Duane, Jenny, you were supposed to..." and King County, Georgia. This is a reference to Morgan's lost family who died in King County.

In "All I See Is Red", Jenny is seen for the first time physically alive in a flashback to when Morgan sees fond memories of his loved ones.

Opening doors was a rare occurrence for the undead, and only occurred with those infected with the variant Wildfire strain.

This makes it likely that Jenny was a variant walker that maintained intelligence about how to open doors and remembered where she died, and where her husband and son were staying at. The climbers encountered in Season 11, including the one encountered in "Variant", were also capable of such skills, causing it to be mistaken for a Whisperer at first.

Jenny was most likely a roamer variant.

Jenny is one of the nine TV Universe characters to appear in Fear the Walking Dead, the others being Morgan Jones, Paul Rovia, Carol Peletier, Rick Grimes, Dwight, Sherry, Duane Jones, and Negan Smith.

TV Series Characters King County Rick • Lambert • Morgan • Paula • Shane • Jenny • Hannah • Leon • Duane Atlanta Camp Carol • Daryl • Carl • Morales • Glenn • Andrea • Merle • Lori • T-Dog • Dale • Sophia • Jacqui • Miranda • Louis • Eliza • Amy • Ed • Jim Nursing Home Miguel • Felipe • Jorge • Guillermo • Mr. Gilbert Center for Disease Control Edwin • Candace Military Personnel Welles • Wilson • Brady • Sean • Franklin • Callaway Greene Family Farm Maggie • Beth • Hershel • Patricia • Jimmy • Annette • Shawn • Arnold • Otis • Josephine The Living Nate • Randall • Sean • Tony • Dave Michonne's Group Michonne • Mike • Terry • Andre The Prison Judith • Bob • Lizzie • Mika • Luke • Molly • Julio • Henry • Noris • Caleb • David • Ryan • Charlie • Patrick • Chloe • Zach • Axel • Oscar • Andrew • Tomas • Big Tiny Woodbury Jeanette • Philip • Mrs. Richards • Ms. McLeod • Martinez • Mr. Jacobson • Eryn • Karen • Mr. Richards • Owen • Greg • Shumpert • Milton • Dr. Stevens • Rowan • Eileen • Mrs. Foster • Betty • Emily • Noah • Paul • Jody • Richard • Haley • Penny • Warren • Michael • Gargulio • Tim • Crowley Tyreese's Group Sasha • Tyreese • Allen • Ben • Donna Apartment Building Tara • Lilly • Meghan • David • Bill Martinez's Group Howard • Mitch • Alisha • Pete Prison Outskirts Sam • Christopher • Ana • Clara Abraham's Group Eugene • Rosita • Abraham The Claimers Dan • Billy • Harley • Tony • Joe • Len • Lou Terminus Martin • Greg • Theresa • Gareth • Albert • Mike • Mary • Alex St. Sarah's Church Gabriel Grady Memorial Hospital Steven • Tanaka • Alvarado • Amanda • Bello • Licari • Percy • McGinley • Franco • Noah • Dawn • O'Donnell • Bob • Jeffries • Gorman • Joan • Gavin • Hanson Alexandria Safe Zone Aaron • Barbara • R.J. • Coco • Ross • Scott • Heath • Kyle • Nora • Mrs. Robinson • Ashley • Jen • Wayne • Vincent • Alex • Cheryl • Enid • Russ • Bob • Bruce • Tobin • Anna • Mikey • Francine • Kent • Spencer • Olivia • Denise • Deanna • Lucy • Ron • Jessie • Sam • Maya • David • Betsy • Nicholas • Annie • Will • Tommy • Sturgess • Barnes • Stacy • Michael • Jeffery • Richards • Holly • Samantha • Bobby • Charlyne • O'Hara • Dinesh • Natalie • Dan • Erin • Adrian • Park • Shelly • Carter • Pete • Reg • Aiden • Eric The Wolves Owen • Edward • Aphid The Saviors Negan • Gracie • Sherry • Dwight • Amber • Tanya • Gina • Potter • José • Brooke • Mel • John • Marcus • Jonah • Alice • Alden • Quan • Laura • Brandon • Frankie • D.J. • Richie • Regina • Jed • Norris • Arat • Justin • Simon • Wade • Duke • Lance • Gary • Reilly • Jared • Evan • Katy • Keno • Derek • Dean • Gavin • Gomez • Paulie • Duke • Mark • Zia • Leo • Yago • Joey • Gunther • Rudy • Todd • Huck • Dino • Nelson • Mara • Gordon • Roy • David • Emmett • Isabelle • Joseph • Chris • George • Neil • Roman • Jiro • Miles • Primo • Paula • Michelle • Molly • Donnie • Gabe • Bud • Timmy • Cam • Tina Hilltop Colony Hershel • Douglas • Papa Bear • Bertie • Kal • Eduardo • Marco • Troy • Roy • Gage • Oscar • Earl • Brianna • Penny • Felix • Adeline • Rodney • Tammy • Casper • Martin • Miles • Hilde • Jesus • Gregory • Kenneth • Stephanie • Craig • Crystal • Wesley • Harlan • Neil • Freddie • Andy • Ethan The Kingdom Ezekiel • Jerry • Dianne • Theresa • Nabila • Ezra • Aliyah • Mariam • Joshua • Jenny • William • Henry • Dana • Kevin • Kurt • Alvaro • Daniel • Colton • Richard • Benjamin Oceanside Cyndie • Rachel • Adrienne • Jules • Beatrice • Kathy • Natania The Scavengers Anne • Tamiel • Brion • Farron • Winslow Georgie's Group Hilda • Midge • Georgie Civic Republic Military Carm Magna's Group Magna • Connie • Kelly • Yumiko • Luke • Bernie The Whisperers Lydia • Adam • Keith • Beta • Alpha • Rufus • Mary • Dante • Frances • Rasmus • Sean • Helen • Zion Baltimore Shelter Cyrus • Amanda • Lamar • Frank • Rose • Matias The Highwaymen Alfred • Margo • Alek • Ozzy Jocelyn's Group Winnie • P.J. • Gina • Linus • Mitchell • Jocelyn Bloodsworth Island Virgil • Lucy • Celeste • Jeremiah • Lisa The Nomads Aiden • Bailey Meridian Elijah • Kim • Frost • Josephine • Teresa • Agatha • Duncan • Cole • Maya • Ainsley • Gus • Billy • Jen The Reapers Leah • Carver • Washington • Boone • Jenson • Mancea • Austin • Fisher • Pope • Deaver • Ancheta • Powell • Paul • Bossie • Michael • Nicholls • Montanio • Matthew The Commonwealth Maxxine • Lim • Garcia • Mercer • Zell • Tomichi • Pamela • Mei • Lewis • Katz • Murphy • Theo • Vickers • Baker • Mr. Martens • Mrs. Martens • Roberts • Rose • Rosie • Clark • Evans • Vazquez • Shira • Elaine • Charles • Kasey • John • Kayla • Marcus • Celeste • Thomas • Johnson • Hart • Quintana • Sally • Carrie • Alexa • Jan • Howell • Henderson • Attila • Captain • Lothar • Lena • Kathleen • Marian • Anton • Lance • Livits • Tyler • Brooks • Sanborn • Wilson • Jones • Nelson • Sebastian • Roman • Sorensen • Romano • McHugh • Phillips • Castle • Alves • Toby • Crowe • Green • April • Jake • Hodges • Jesse • William Valak's Vipers Craven Franklin's Group Franklin Opium Poppy Farm Moto Riverbend Annie • Ian • Hart Miscellaneous Survivors Princess • Joshua • Wilhelm • Tom • Jesse • Billy • Mays • Siddiq • Milo • Amelia • Leslie • Eastman • Ellen • A.J. • Becca • Mr. Siggard • Mrs. Siggard • Mrs. Blake • Lucille Animals Dog • Nelly • Shiva • Tabitha • Buttons • Duke • Flame • Violet • Hunter Walkers Delly • Carla • Joe Sr. • Tony • Ms. Tuscany • Nick • Erin • Doug • Louise • Wayne • Summer • Eddie Alive characters appear in green. Unknown characters appear in blue. Dead characters appear in red and italics. Undead characters appear in gray and italics.