Howard Dietz kept his day job for 40 years, loyally ballyhooing Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films. But yesterday he was honored for what he did in his spare time - writing the lyrics for more than 500 songs, including such American pop classics as ''Dancing in the Dark,'' ''You and the Night and the Music'' and ''That's Entertainment.''

Mr. Dietz became the first recipient of the annual Richard Rodgers award from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), an award given for contributions to the American musical theater. Because he is 87 years old and bedridden - he has suffered from Parkinson's disease for many years -Mr. Dietz received the award at his Manhattan home.

The award, an engraved scroll, was presented by Mrs. Dorothy Rodgers, Richard Rodgers's widow. Among those who attened were the lyricist Hal David, president of ASCAP; the actress Lillian Gish; the composers Burton Lane, Morton Gould, Kay Smith, Harold Rome and Mr. Dietz's long-time collaborator, Arthur Schwartz; the lyricist Betty Comden, and the artist Al Hirschfeld. A check for $5,000 accompanied the award.

On Broadway, Mr. Dietz is known as the lyricist for revues and musicals from 1918, when he first had a lyric sung on a Broadway stage, to 1963, when ''Jennie,'' his 14th complete Broadway show, had its premiere. His collaborators include Jerome Kern, George Gershwin, Vernon Duke and Sammy Fain. But from 1929 on, he wrote most of his songs with Arthur Schwartz, who supplied melodies for ''Moanin' Low,'' ''I Guess I'll Have to Change My Plan,'' ''If There Is Someone Lovelier Than You'' and other pop standards.

''Arthur and I got along well,'' Mr. Dietz wrote in his crisply understated 1974 autobiography, ''Dancing in the Dark.'' ''Sometimes, I would suggest a title and even a rhythm with a melody, but more often he would write a tune first. I have been asked several times how it was decided whether we should bill ourselves Dietz and Schwartz or Schwartz and Dietz. I explained that it depended on which of us was nearest the printer.'' 'Make it Not Pompous'

''Once at Howard's house, very late at night,'' Arthur Schwartz remembered recently, ''he said something along the lines of 'I would like us to write a song about the human condition.' I said, 'Doesn't that sound pompous?' and he said, 'Maybe we can make it not pompous.' He had a long shelf of books, and, looking along it, came upon an unsuccessful novel, ''Dancers in the Dark.'' We changed that into a title - ''Dancing in the Dark'' - and luckily I came up with a good tune. I brought it back the next day, and he finished the lyrics: Dancing in the dark Till the tune ends We're dancing in the dark And it soon ends We're waltzing in the wonder of why we're here Time hurries by - we're here and gone. * ''We thought it was a good song, but not commercial.''

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.