About this Item

With an Inscribed Photograph of Howard Dietz DIETZ, Howard. Dancing in the Dark. Words by Howard Dietz. New York: Quadrangle, [1974]. With a signed photograph of Howard Dietz inscribed "To Paul R. Palmer. Howard Dietz" pasted to the front free endpaper. First edition. Octavo (9 1/4 x 6 inches; 235 x 152 mm.). [xiv], [1]-370 pp. Illustrated throughout with black & white photogravures. Publisher's blue boards, spine lettered in silver, printed dust jacket. A fine copy. "Dancing in the Dark" is a popular American song, with music by Arthur Schwartz and lyrics by Howard Dietz, that was introduced by John Barker with Tilly Losch dancing in the 1931 revue The Band Wagon. The song was first recorded by Bing Crosby on August 19, 1931 with Studio Orchestra directed by Victor Young, staying on the pop charts for six weeks, peaking at #3, and helping to make it a lasting standard. Howard Dietz (1896-1983) was an American publicist, lyricist, and librettist, best remembered for his songwriting collaboration with Arthur Schwartz. Seller Inventory # 05874

Contact seller

Report this item

WHAT IS DAVID BRASS RARE BOOKS? David Brass Rare Books, Inc. specializes in buying and selling only the finest examples of English, American and European Literature, Children's Books, Color-Plate Books, Illustrated Books, Early Printed Books, Private Press Books, Fine Bindings, Original Artwork, Manuscripts, High Spot Modern First Editions, Rare Books and High Spots. HOW WE WORK We fully catalogue and photograph all of our items. We realize that every book has its own unique characteristics, so our catalogue descriptions give you a clear and precise explanation of condition, style, history, etc. Our photographs are of the highest digital quality, and will give you the clearest idea of what out items actually look like. We believe that this detailed information will provide a greater sense of confidence to the discerning collector who is considering a purchase. CONSIGNMENTS Consignments are welcome. If you want to use our name and contacts to find a home for your rare pieces, ask us about our terms. We offer full security and insurance while we house your item.

Visit Seller's Storefront

Association Member Members of these associations are committed to maintaining the highest standards. They vouch for the authenticity of all items offered for sale. They provide expert and detailed descriptions, disclose all significant defects and/or restorations, provide clear and accurate pricing, and operate with fairness and honesty during the purchase experience.

Seller's business information

David Brass Rare Books, Inc.

P.O. Box 9029, Calabasas, CA, 91372, U.S.A.

Terms of Sale:

We guarantee the condition of every book as it's described on the Abebooks web sites. If you are

dissatisfied with your purchase (Incorrect Book/Not as Described/Damaged) or if the order hasn't

arrived, you're eligible for a refund within 30 days of the estimated delivery date. If you've changed your

mind about a book that you've ordered, please use the Ask bookseller a question link to contact us and

we'll respond within 2 business days.

Shipping Terms:

DELIVERY

We will ship worldwide by FedEx, UPS and US Post. Please ask for details of insurance and freight.

PRICING

All prices are in US dollars. For our overseas customers please email us for a conversion into your currency if needed. Shipping and Insurance will be charged at cost. Payment by MasterCard, Visa, or American Express credit card is acceptable. Checks require ten days to clear.