UPCOMING at City Life

CITY LIFE CHURCH

EVENTS, CLASSES, ANNOUNCEMENTS & MORE!

Grow and learn with us! Everybody’s welcome in our Father’s house!

YOUTH GROUP CONNECT

Calling all City Life Youth!

Sunday Morning connect has begun. Be sure to join us in the youth room between 1st and 2nd services on Sunday mornings this summer to check-in, say “hey”, and grab a couple of donuts. We hope to stay connected with all middle and high school students this summer by touching base and keeping up to date on how God is working in your life.



SHARED LIFE AT THE PARTY

SUNDAY, AUGUST 25

Prepare for great food and great fun on Sunday, August 25 from 4:00 p.m.-7:00 p.m. We will celebrate the end of our shared life summer and the end of Pastor Christy’s sabbatical by having a big party complete with a pig roast, ice cream, inflatables and goats! The Skidmore’s are hosting and transportation in the van will be available as needed. Scan the QR code to sign-up!



SHARED LIFE EVENTS

In addition to life groups this summer, we are coordinating several Shared Life Events. These are posted in the lobby for you to check out and get signed up for. Shared life doesn’t only mean weekly groups, it means sharing in all forms of community. These events are a great way to involve the whole family in Shared Life this summer! There are also links and descriptions of the Shared Life Events on the Life Groups page.



JULY & AUGUST NEWSLETTERS

In July & August we will not be sending out a paper copy of the newsletter. We will have paper copies available at the Welcome Table and electronic copies will still be sent via email. Not currently receiving the monthly news? Fill out a communication card at church with your email and check the box on the back… or check the box(es) on the Online Communication Card Form to receive monthly newsletters!



SUMMER SHOWER OUTREACH 2024

MTM's Mobile Shower Unit in Our Parking Lot

We are partnering with Mel Trotter Outreach Ministries this summer as we host their mobile shower unit in our parking lot. We will also be serving breakfast to our unsheltered neighbors and friends who come to shower during this time.

DATES: Monday, June 3 from 10:00 a.m.–12:00 p.m. through August 26. If you are interested in volunteering, you can sign up in the lobby, scan the QR code, or contact Emily Struckmeyer at [email protected] or Jordan Satterthwaite at [email protected].



BAPTISM

If you are interested in baptism, please mark “baptism” on your communication card and we will reach out with details.



CHURCH VAN SCHEDULE

The Sunday pick-up schedule for the van is:

9:00 a.m. Mel Trotter Ministries

9:05 a.m. Ferguson

9:45 a.m. 44th and Byron Center (Ramblewood Apartments)

10:00 a.m. 32nd and Eastern

10:10 a.m. Logan and Eastern

City Life Church

10:30 a.m. Lake Michigan Dr. And Gold St.

City Life Church

Rides home will be given after the service as well.

If you’re new to needing a ride to church, please call the church office so we can make accommodation.

Looking for a good way to meet City Lifers? The transportation team is looking for on-call, small group, and Sunday morning drivers. If interested, please write “Drive” on your Communication Card at church or use our online Contact Form and we will get in touch with you!



PINE REST CAP PROGRAM

City Life has a partnership with Pine Rest CAP program to provide a variety of counseling and resources to assist those who need them! If talk therapy is something you’re feeling inclined to try – your first three sessions are free! Give them a call at: 800.442.0809

RECOVERY IS POSSIBLE!

Pine Rest offers a full continuum of addiction services that include residential detoxification, inpatient, intensive outpatient, opioid maintenance, medication management, individual and group therapy and family services at the treatment center in Grand Rapids. For help, please call 866.852.4001.

What else is happening at City Life Church?