The Russian Revolution(s) and the Russian Civil War represent topics revisited by the recent Russian media and film-making. Mikhail Sholokhov's novel And Quiet Flows the Don as a masterful case of fictionalisation of historical events is the basis for four subsequent film adaptations. Whereas the destiny of the Russian Cossacks is a generous theme, we would like to focus on the filmic representation of Cossacks' bordering process in the Civil War. Two Soviet film adaptations and two post-Soviet ones present in different manners the impact of the shifting borders on people's lives during the Russian fratricide war. Tzar's abdication had caused confusion in the midst of the Cossack population loyal to the state father figure, while contributing afterwards to a territorial identity construction and a fight to obtain and maintain the autonomy of the Cossack region. Soviet and post-Soviet directors' approaches of the geographical, mental and cultural borders during the Civil War in the Cossack region offer insights into the debatable loyalties and multiple sides shifting. The analysis of the four film adaptations is focused on concepts such as questioned loyalty, divisive Cossack territorial identity, nuanced and shifting identity and active/ passive territoriality. We argue that the Cossacks' territorial identity and their bordering process is differently reflected in subsequent film adaptations of the novel. While the history of Russian Cossacks is not the concern of this paper, it is important to bear in mind that initially the Cossack identity was not necessarily linked to a territory. That was due to their lifestyle, linked to the meaning of Turkic kazak, "adventurer" or "free man,"-self-governing military communities mainly hunting, fishing and working the land without settling for much time in one place. In the 16 th century, there were six major Cossack communities of Russian and Ukrainian origin that over centuries had formed their separate identity in the area of the Don, the Dnieper, the Volga, and the middle of the Ural River. Since the 17 th century, Cossacks had benefited from the special autonomous status within the Russian Empire, acting as border protectors and ruthless suppressors of rebellions and revolutionary activities. By the end of the 19 th century, given the territorial expansion to Siberia, there were eleven Cossack groups, all of them gradually losing the autonomous status and having to serve in the Russian Army. Due to the territorial expansion, Cossacks were no longer border inhabitants, but they preserved their way of life and frontiersman thinking (Tschebotarioff, 1961, p. 206).