About this Item

Original vintage Soviet film poster for a movie based on a book by LN Tolstoy about a man's journey from St Petersburg to the Caucasus - Kazaki / ?????? / The Cossacks - directed by Vasili Pronin and starring Leonid Gubanov, Boris Andreyev and Zinaida Kirienko, featuring an image of a lady in a white headscarf standing next to a man on the other side of a fence with a tower, Cossacks on horses and mountains in the background. Good condition, folds, creasing, pinholes, tears, staining, paper losses on edges and on image. Size: 102x67. Seller Inventory # PC1610

Contact seller

Report this item

AntikBar is the London gallery specialising in original vintage posters covering a wide variety of subjects - travel, advertising, sport, cinema, war, propaganda - from around the world. Our stock is available to view at our gallery and on our website. We host regular original vintage poster auctions, offer collection advice, consultancy and search on demand services. We provide worldwide delivery and offer professional linen backing and poster restoration services with our partners in California. Please contact us if you have any queries or visit us at our gallery: 404 King's Road, Chelsea, London SW10 0LJ. Our opening hours are Monday-Friday 10am-6pm; Saturday 11am-6pm (by appointment only on Sundays and bank holidays). AntikBar is a Member of The Association of Art & Antiques Dealers (LAPADA), UK Posters Network and the International Vintage Poster Dealers' Association (IVPDA).

Visit Seller's Storefront

Association Member Members of these associations are committed to maintaining the highest standards. They vouch for the authenticity of all items offered for sale. They provide expert and detailed descriptions, disclose all significant defects and/or restorations, provide clear and accurate pricing, and operate with fairness and honesty during the purchase experience.

Seller's business information

AntikBar Limited

404 King's Road, LONDON, SW100LJ, United Kingdom

Terms of Sale:

We ship posters worldwide rolled in shock-resistant and hard wearing tubes. Unless specified otherwise, delivery is free within the UK and standard international delivery is £35. We use Royal Mail special delivery with insurance for postage in the UK and signed and tracked service courier service (UPS, DHL or DPD) for international shipments. We dispatch items within 1-2 working days and notify customers if there is any delay. Delivery to UK addresses usually takes 2-3 working days. Delivery to ...

More Information

Shipping Terms:

Posters are shipped rolled in sturdy tubes, books and magazines in flat stiff cardboard packaging.