Description

Product Reviews

Description

The Aristocats DVD 1970 Macsakarisztokraták / Walt Disney Classic / Directed by Wolfgang Reitherman / Starring: Phil Harris, Eva Gabor, Hermione Baddeley, Gary Dubin

UPC 5996255707274

REGION 2 PAL DVD

MADE IN HUNGARY

AUDIO: English 5.1, French 5.1, Dutch 5.1, Hungarian 2., Polish 2.1, Arabic 2.0

SUBTITLES: English, French, Dutch, Polish

Runtime: 76 minutes

English Summary:

The Aristocats is a 1970 American animated romantic adventure musical comedy film directed by Wolfgang Reitherman. It was produced by Walt Disney Productions and released by Buena Vista Distribution. The 20th Disney animated feature film, the film is based on a story by Tom McGowan and Tom Rowe, and revolves around a family of aristocratic cats, and how an alley cat acquaintance helps them after a butler has kidnapped them to gain his mistress's fortune which was intended to go to them. The film features the voices of Eva Gabor, Hermione Baddeley, Phil Harris, Dean Clark, Sterling Holloway, Scatman Crothers, and Roddy Maude-Roxby.

In Paris 1910, mother cat Duchess and her three kittens, Berlioz, Marie, and Toulouse, live with retired opera diva Madame Adelaide Bonfamille, and her English butler, Edgar. One day while preparing her will with lawyer Georges Hautecourt, Madame declares that her fortune will be left to her cats until their deaths, and thereafter to Edgar. Edgar hears this through a speaking tube and plots to eliminate the cats. He later sedates them by putting sleeping pills in a milk mixture intended for them, and drives them to the countryside to abandon them. There, he is ambushed by two hounds named Napoleon and Lafayette, losing his hat and umbrella, and the cats are stranded in the countryside, while Madame Adelaide, Roquefort the mouse and Frou-Frou the horse discover their absence.

Voice Cast / Szereplők - Hangok

Eva Gabor as Duchess – Madame Adelaide's refined and elegant cat and mother of the three kittens, who are forced to choose between loyalty to Madame and her own attachment to Thomas O'Malley at the end of the film. Robie Lester provided the singing voice for Duchess.

Phil Harris as Thomas O'Malley (full name: Abraham de Lacy Giuseppe Casey Thomas O'Malley) – a feral cat who befriends Duchess and her kittens, becoming a father figure to the kittens and falling in love with Duchess. For cultural reasons, the Italian dubbing of the film changes him to “Romeo, er mejo der Colosseo” (Roman dialect for "The best [cat] of the Colosseum"), an Italian cat from Rome speaking with a strong Roman accent; the reason for this change is that alley cats were well-known for frequenting the Colosseum at the time.

Gary Dubin as Toulouse – the oldest kitten, who idolizes all alley cats, especially O’Malley. He is also a talented painter and is loosely based on French painter Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec.

Liz English as Marie – the middle kitten and the only girl. She is often imperious or snobbish towards her brothers but is her mother's special companion, and like her, she is an accomplished singer.

Dean Clark as Berlioz – the youngest kitten. He is somewhat timid and shy and is a talented pianist. He is named after the French composer Hector Berlioz.

Roddy Maude-Roxby as Edgar Balthazar – Madame Adelaide's dim-witted butler, who tries to get rid of her cats in order to inherit her fortune.

Scatman Crothers as Scat Cat – O’Malley's best friend and leader of a gang of jazz-playing alley cats. Scat Cat plays the trumpet.

Paul Winchell as Shun Gon – a Chinese cat in Scat Cat's gang. He plays both the piano and drums made from pots.

Lord Tim Hudson as Hit Cat – an English cat in Scat Cat's gang. He plays acoustic guitar.

Vito Scotti as Peppo – an Italian cat in Scat Cat's gang. He plays the accordion.

Thurl Ravenscroft as Billy Boss – a Russian cat in Scat Cat's gang. He plays the double bass.

Sterling Holloway as Roquefort – a house mouse and a friend of the cats, who assist in the expulsion of Edgar.

Pat Buttram as Napoleon – a bloodhound who attacks Edgar when he intrudes on the farm where he lives. Whenever his cohort Lafayette makes a suggestion, Napoleon insists that he is in charge, then adopts Lafayette's suggestion as his own.

George Lindsey as Lafayette – a Basset Hound and Napoleon's companion. He sometimes proves smarter than Napoleon but is also timider.

Hermione Baddeley as Madame Adelaide Bonfamille – a wealthy former opera singer and the owner of Duchess and her kittens.

Charles Lane as Georges Hautecourt – Madame Adelaide’s eccentric lawyer, who is also her oldest friend. He is extremely lively, despite his advanced age.

Nancy Kulp as Frou-Frou – Madame Adelaide’s carriage horse and Roquefort's companion, who subdues Edgar. Ruth Buzzi provided her singing voice.

Monica Evans as Abigail Gabble – a goose who befriends the cats.

Carole Shelley as Amelia Gabble – Abigail's twin sister.

Bill Thompson as Uncle Waldo – the drunken gander uncle of Abigail and Amelia.

Peter Renaday as French Milkman/Le Petit Cafe Cook/Truck Movers (uncredited)

Directed by Wolfgang Reitherman Produced by Winston Hibler

Wolfgang Reitherman Story by Ken Anderson

Larry Clemmons

Eric Cleworth

Vance Gerry

Julius Svendsen

Frank Thomas

Ralph Wright Based on "The Aristocats" by Tom McGowan and Tom Rowe Starring Phil Harris

Eva Gabor

Hermione Baddeley

Gary Dubin

Dean Clark

Sterling Holloway

Roddy Maude-Roxby

Liz English Music by George Bruns Edited by Tom Acosta

Production

company

Walt Disney Productions

Distributed by Buena Vista Distribution

Release date

December 11, 1970 (premiere)

December 24, 1970 (United States)

Running time

76 minutes Country United States Language English

Product Reviews

No reviews yet Write a Review