Saturday 6th July saw ADO Den Haag take on Belgian club side Cercle Brugge in the second of their pre-season friendlies at the home of HVV Laakkwartier.

The game was a true pre-season friendly; there was no real heart or fight in this clash. The visitors seemed quite happy to allow ADO to have the ball and just defend deep. Cercle rarely broke into the ADO half giving Coutinho a very nice time enjoying the sunshine.

ADO forced the Cercle keeper Bram Verbist into a few saves and also peppered the box with high crosses, which in truth were all wasted.

The second half was not much better, even after both teams made wholesale changes on the hour mark. ADO again had the better chances and it took some good goal keeping by sub keeper Jo Coppens to keep ADO at bay.

It looked as though the game would end goalless, only for Cercle to be award a penalty in the ninetieth minute after Beugelsdijk fouled Thomas Debaene inside the area, Karel Vanroose placing the ball into the bottom right corner giving Martijn de Zwart no chance.

ADO put on a lot of pressure in the final minutes of injury but to no avail, Cercle Brugge were the winners, the result was not a fair reflection on the game considering the amount of possession ADO had throughout the ninety minutes.

Attendance 1,200.

On Monday 8th July ADO held their press day at the Kyocera showing off the new kit and their new players; it is going to be an exciting season ahead.

Wednesday August 10th ADO played their third warm up game of the pre-season against second division side Oss FC. As far as friendlies go this game was not too bad at all.

Both sides didn’t sit back, both looked to move forward, yet it was the visiting side who looked the more confident in their play at the start. They had chances early on to take the lead, but a few good stops by de Zwart in goal saved some early blushes.

The scored stayed level until the last minute of the half, as the ball was played into the area, Beugelsdijk was judged to have handled the ball and the referee awarded a penalty. That is now two penalties against Tom Beugelsdijk in two games, a trend that has to stop soon! The spot kick was cleanly taken by Danny v/d Meiracker, 0-1.

The second half saw a more dominant performance from ADO. Many substitutions were made and they took to the task in hand really well. ADO had several great opportunities to draw level but were denied by the keeper or by refereeing decisions. They also missed a penalty.It was starting to look as though ADO would be second best again but again, in the final minute of the half ADO got the goal they deserved: A header from new man Catalin Tira beating Richard Arends in the Oss goal to make it 1-1.

The ref blew his whistle ten seconds after the restart. It was an entertaining game which ADO could have won, but it is a building process as all the new players need to fit into the jigsaw before the new season starts.

Attendance 1, 611

ADO Open Day

The next friendly for ADO is this coming Saturday, 13th July at the Kyocera stadium when they take on British Premier League side Swansea City in a high profile friendly., kick-off is at 12,30. This is all part of ADO’s family/open day with activities going on until 18.00: Lots to see and do plus get the chance to meet the ADO players, get their autographs and have a picture taken with them. Click here for more information.