NICKY Henson, Una Stubbs’ second husband, was a British actor and ladies' man whose career spanned an impressive 57 years.

Here’s everything we know about Nicky.

Who was Una Stubbs’ ex-husband Nicky Henson?

Henson rose to fame in the 1960s, as his charm and cheeky grin made him popular with audiences.

He had a reputation as a ladies' man, and played a lothario on Fawlty Towers who gave Basil the run-around, and this seemingly reflected his personal life.

Henson married Una Stubbs in 1969.

The pair divorced six years later after Henson’s infidelity.

Henson walked out on her, first into a relationship with Avengers star Linda Thorson, and then with actress Susan Hampshire who was his co-star in many stage productions.

The couple remained good friends after their divorce.

Henson remarried in 1986 to ballerina Marguerite Porter, who he stayed with for 35 years, until his death in 2019.

Henson and Stubbs were reunited when they both acted in EastEnders in 2006.

Luckily, the two remained good friends and were speaking at the time.

Did the couple have kids?

The couple had two children together, Christian and Joe .

Christian Henson

Christian Henson is a composer, who has won multiple awards and has over 45 films to his name.

He is considered a true force in the UK film industry.

Notable work of his includes the composition to hit cult TV series Inside No9 and the multi-award winning Fresh Meat.

He also wrote the score for the ITV four-part drama Tutankhamun and the television movie The Go-Between.

Christian was born on Christmas Day in 1971.

Joe Henson

Joe Henson is also a composer.

Born on September 18, 1973, he began his musical career at the age of 14 when he started playing bass.

He has toured in Europe and the United States and played with group Freestylers, who played at festivals to crowds of up to 23,000.

What TV, theatre and movies did Nicky Henson star in?

Henson’s career lasted 57 years.

He appeared in EastEnders, Downton Abbey, The Bill and Doctors, to name a few.

Henson also performed on stage, completing a period with the Royal Shakespeare Company and appeared in much loved classics like Oscar Wilde’s An Ideal Husband and Camelot.

He also acted in films, including Vera Drake and George Clooney’s Syriana.