Solange's ex-spouse, Daniel J Smith, showed off his sons in a heartwarming post on social media as he introduced them to followers.

Daniel Smith flaunted his bundles of joy in a recent Instagram snapshot as he introduced them as his "oldest and youngest son" to the delight of followers.

Solange Knowles and her son, Julez Smith attending an event in May 2014. | Photo: Getty Images

The one-photo post presented a radiant view of Smiths' sons, Julez and Five. The adorable duo was photographed outdoors as they posed for the camera. The doting dad put up many heart emojis as he wrote in his caption:

"Oldest and Youngest… Julez and Five."

Julez, the oldest, had his baby brother in his arms while sporting a pair of colorful baggy shorts and a black t-shirt. He stylishly rocked his black t-shirt with one sleeve pulled up to reveal a white vest.

He completed his outfit with a red face cap. Little Five was all shades of cute in a patterned long-sleeved top and a pair of grey joggers.

According to Knowles, getting divorced at a young age gave her a deeper understanding of life.

Fans were in awe of the Smith boys as they trooped to the comments to show their admiration. A psyched follower shared: "Love it!" Another fan expressed their surprise at how much Julez has grown. Someone gushed over Five's cuteness while adding a love-struck emoji.

Smith shares the parenting of his son, Julez, with ex-wife and music star, Solange Knowles. The two started their romance as teenagers and got married in their teen years as well, having their only son together in 2004.

When Knowles, who is Beyonce's younger sister, married Smith, she moved to Idaho to be with him. Once in an interview, the singer shared that it was the "most bittersweet moment" of her life. She had to put her career aside to face motherhood and cater to her son.

Besides her impressive music career, Knowles does not shy away from sharing the experiences of her early marriage and eventual divorce. According to Knowles, getting divorced at a young age gave her a deeper understanding of life.

She referred to it as a "jump-start." She once said: "Just going through a marriage and a divorce-which I essentially did by 21-will give you an insane amount of perspective on life…"

Although Smith and Knowles are no longer together, the duo made sure to develop a civil relationship for the sake of their now-grown son.

ncG1vNJzZmimlazAb63MqKSapZFjsLC5jmtob21hZ3q0u8uapaCdo2KyuXnHrqqbmZ6ZerS0wKucrGWTqsGmec%2Bhpq2nXai8b7TTpqM%3D