The Knowles family has a new name making headlines.

Daniel Julez Smith Jr., the son of Solange Knowles and her ex-husband Daniel Smith, debuted as a runway model at the Luar fall 2024 fashion show on Tuesday in New York. Wearing a dramatic leather coat, Smith Jr. was supported by his grandma, Tina Knowles, and his superstar aunt, Beyoncé, who were sitting in the show’s front row.

His first job as a came at only 3 years old when he was invited to be the face of a line of hip-hop-inspired toys called “Baby Jamz: Daily Lessons and Jamz Sessions,” created by Music World Entertainment which is owned by his grandfather, Matthew Knowles.

Dipping into the fashion world at a young age, Smith Jr. accompanied his mom at Macy’s event announcing Anna Dello Russo as the new editor-at-large for its contemporary line INC International Concepts.

During his teen years, Smith Jr. revealed a passion for sports. “Basketball. That’s my life like that’s all I do, basketball and school,” he told the radio station 97.9 The Box in 2019. Following the steps of his musical family, Smith Jr. also told the station that he was learning how to produce music at the time.

Smith Jr. is often seen at events organized by Beyoncé. He has posed for photos with many celebrities before, including Meghan Thee Stallion. In 2020, Beyoncé and her husband, Jay Z, hosted a party in their Bel-Air mansion to celebrate Smith Jr.’s 16th birthday.

In 2022, Smith Jr. showed his love for hip-hop on TikTok, where he shared videos performing rap songs. In 2023, he attended the world premiere of “Renassaince: A Film by Beyoncé” in Los Angeles with Tina Knowles.

On his Instagram account, Smith Jr. has more than 70,000 followers with only two posts published so far. The first one, posted on Oct. 20, shows him modeling a distressed jacket by Heliot Emil. The picture was taken by Blair Caldwell, who works closely with Beyoncé and Kylie Jenner. The young model often uses the social media platform to share updates on his career and different outfits on Instagram Stories.