Amrit Name Meaning in English

What does the name Amrit mean? What is the meaning of the name Amrit, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

Means "immortal" from Sanskrit अ (a) meaning "not" and मृत (mrta) meaning "dead". In Hindu texts it refers to a drink which gives immortality.

Amrit Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Meaning: Nectar Hindi: अमृत Gender: Boy Origin: hindi Religion: Hindu Suitable for: Boys / Male / Guys Hardness: Easy to pronounce, Amrit is a short name Uniqueness: It is a common name Short & Easy: Yes Syllables: 3 Syllables, 5 Letters and 1 Words

Amrit Name Meaning in Hindi ⟶

Related or Similar Names

If you like the meanings or synonyms of name Amrit; we have created list of popular names that can be considered as alternative of the name Amrit.

Below names are with similar meaning as Nectar. Explore the list below for names that not only share a similar meaning to "Nectar" but also encapsulate the essence and significance associated with the name "Amrit."

Need Sibling Names For Amrit?

Brothers sibling names for Amrit can be chosen from the list below.

Hindi Name Birth Star (Janam Nakshatra), Rashi & Syllables

Amrit Name Lucky Number 7

Amrit Name Numerology And Personality

Amrit has the numerology 3. The religion is hindu. These people with numerology 3 are known to be very expressive and they are very verbal about everything that they want or they like in their life. The meaning of this beautiful name is Nectar. These people are known to be opinionated and that is what makes them different from others.

They are also thought to be social birds because they like to socialize so much. the gender of this name Amrit is Boy. These are the people who know how to enjoy their life the most and that is because they know the joy of living. And they are also known to be very fond of art.

These people are very much into art and that is what makes them extremely creative with everything that they decide to do.

Popular personalities with Amrit Name.

Amrit Name Wallpaper

Amrit name wallpaper,Amrit bella wallpaper, Amrit name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Amrit name on photo online, Amrit name writing style online, Write Amrit name on image online, Write Amrit name pic & wallpaper, Amrit 3D name wallpapers editing, Amrit new wallpaper, Amrit 3d name creator online, Amrit name background maker, Create my name in style for Amrit

See Amrit Name Wallpaper ⟶

How People Search Amrit