OTTAWA COUNTY — An “upward trend” in crime was reflected in the 2021 annual report from the Ottawa County Sheriff’s Office, according to Sheriff Steve Kempker.

“2020 was a low year because of COVID,” Kempker explained. “That throws off a lot of your percentages.”

Call volume to Ottawa County’s 911 was down compared to previous years, with police having less traffic stops and generally less contact with people in 2020 and 2021. The courts were closed for a period of time last year, and Kempker said they are “still working through the backlog (of cases).”

A particularly alarming number to Kempker was the 47 percent increase in weapons across the county. Police are finding more weapons as they investigate crimes and deal with people during traffic stops and other situations. What’s new and increasing is the presence of “ghost guns,” which are unregistered and built from parts off the internet.

“We’re starting to see more of them &mldr; not serial numbered and not registered,” the sheriff said. “Private transactions are done over the internet and then shipped.”

While the increase in homemade weapons is a national trend, Kempker said it’s also happening right here at home.

“I recovered two a week ago,” he said. “They’re out there.”

There has been a slight uptick in marijuana impairment while driving, Kempker said, as the substance has been legalized in the state.

Fraud, or theft by deception, is at “the top of the list” for Ottawa County detectives, who, on average, work 30-35 cases at a time. Kempker said the cold case team identified a homicide victim, who has been unidentified for 26 years.

More: Community Impact Day succeeds with 200+ volunteers, 22 nonprofits

More: Teen team creates video on child sex abuse support services

Two detectives are assigned to the Children’s Advocacy Center, which saw 852 child sexual misconduct and abuse cases in 2021.

“These numbers are staggering and concerning,” Kempker said. “I always stress victims are our No. 1 priority.”

Domestic violence numbers are rising in the county, with an increase in strangulation cases.

“We have not really come up with a reason why we are seeing more strangulation,” Kempker said, adding that the Sheriff’s Office partners with the Resilience organization for domestic violence victims.

The county’s “dramatic increase in mental health issues” that is “plaguing our community,” Kempker said, is another priority for the Sheriff’s Office, with the recent installment of its Crisis Intervention Team. The team works to help victims receive mental health treatment before criminal punishment, if possible. Since the team was launched in October 2021, they’ve handled at least 235 cases.

“We deal with mental health daily, whether it’s on the night shift or the day shift,” Kempker said. “We’ve diverted people from jail. We’ve got them to the right facilities to get the care they need. The biggest part is the follow-up. &mldr; We’ve eliminated &mldr; the part where they start to go downhill again. I’m so happy with this program. It has helped so many people.”

More: Holland council approves purchase of mobile command center for police dept.

More: Social worker-police pairing to respond to mental health calls a success so far in Ottawa County

Kempker said the county is proud to have “law enforcement service delivered with customer service in mind.”

On another positive note, Kempker said there are less people lodged in the Ottawa County Jail.

“That does not bother me at all,” he added.

That lower number is because of the general decrease in crime since 2020 and 2021, and with the use of divergent programs by the court, meaning people can work on their mental health, addiction or other issues instead of going to jail.

“Those programs have been really successful in our county,” Kempker said.

In addition, programs within the jail have been successful in terms of adding efficiency, the sheriff said. From a popular Women’s Resource Center program to the new tablet program, where inmates have access to a tablet to email family, order items from the commissary, communicate with corrections and medical staff, read books, work on a GED program, and more.

“So far it’s been extremely successful,” Kempker said. “It’s not just them being able to sit there and watch movies. That’s very limited. The big thing for us is they are able to send communications to our corrections staff and to our medical staff. We’re looking into telehealth in the future. &mldr; Everything is tracked and it’s closely monitored, and we are able to respond back. Efficiency in the jail has improved greatly.”

All emails going in and out via inmates are “scanned for content,” Kempker added, and inmates are allowed to watch only certain rated movies. Each “pod” of inmates in the jail shares eight to 10 tablets, which they have to sign out to use.

Another effort Kempker is proud of is the Sheriff’s Office’s use of community policing long before Gov. Gretchen Whitmer made statewide suggestions to police.

“We started it about 30 years ago,” he said. “We’ve carried that on as the backbone of our agency.”