It's not the fabled Hearst Castle on the California coast, but close: The late publishing tycoon William Randolph Hearst's 1920s Beverly Hills mansion, where he partied with celebrities during Hollywood's Golden Age, is up for sale at $195 million.

The massive estate, called the Beverly House, was later used to convey inconceivable wealth in such movies as "The Godfather" and "The Bodyguard."

In real life, it was the place, chosen from every other romantic spot in the world, that Jacqueline and John F. Kennedy elected to spend their honeymoon in 1953.

Afterward, the newlyweds sent their host a hand-written letter saying the visit "was such like Christmas ..."

The property, which is three blocks from Sunset Boulevard and the Beverly Hills Hotel, was used years later as Kennedy's West Coast presidential election headquarters, according to TopTenRealEstateDeals.com.

Coincidentally, dwellings spread across the five-acre compound have a combined 55,000 square feet of living space, which is the size of the White House in Washington, D.C.

Hearst, who was the inspiration for the unscrupulous newspaper magnate in Orson Welles' 1941 Academy Award-winning masterpiece, "Citizen Kane," didn't build the Beverly Hills house as he did Hearst Castle. Instead, his longtime partner, the ebullient actress Marion Davies, bought it for them during the Depression for a drop in the bucket: $120,000.

The original owner was a wealthy Los Angeles banker who had hired Gordon Kaufmann, the architect of the Hoover Dam, oil baron scion's Doheny estate, called Greystone Mansion, and some of the other most important estates in the Beverly Hills area, to design a residential sanctuary at 1011 N. Beverly Dr.

The total cost to build the terracotta stucco mansion inspired by Spanish and Italian architecture was $1 million, according to documents.

The main house was a mix of Mediterranean villa styles like Hearst Castle, which was designed by prominent architect, Julia Morgan, and created in phases between 1919 and 1947 in San Simeon.

Hearst named his coastal estate "La Cuesta Encantada" (Spanish for "The Enchanted Hill"), but he called it "the ranch."

The property, buildings, art and antiques were donated to the state of California in 1954, three years after Hearst died. In 1958, Hearst San Simeon State Park was opened for public tours.

As in the San Simeon property, the Beverly Hills estate has a grand main house and separate structures. In Beverly Hills, there's a cabana suite by the pool as well a separate quarters for the security staff.

The Beverly Hills estate is an example of H-form architecture, characterized by long colonnades, wide balconies and arched floor-to-ceiling windows, according to TopTenRealEstateDeals.com.

The grand living room has hand-painted walls that rise 22 feet high to an arched ceiling. Hearst and Davies used this wood-paneled room as a ballroom or theater when screening his Cosmopolitan Productions' releases, her movies or films starring their friends Charlie Chaplin, Greta Garbo, Cary Grant or the Marx Brothers.

The two-story library has hand-carved paneling and a wraparound walkway. A 32-foot-long billiards room has herringbone parquet floors. The intricately designed ceiling and carved fireplace were once installed at Hearst Castle.

The billiard room is at the end of the main floor hallway, which stretches almost as long as the distance between major league baseball bases. From the entry, visitors can see almost 115 feet of opulent decor.

The upstairs hallway is more than 102 feet long. On one wall is a 40-foot wide, Art Deco mural by Dennis Abbe.

The main house has 19 bedrooms and suites, a commercial-grade kitchen and two screening rooms. There is also a seven-bedroom house on a separate legal parcel, which, along with The Beverly House, comprises The Beverly House Compound.

Sitting on its own promontory, the Beverly House property is protected by four security gates, according to listing agent Mauricio Umansky of The Agency.

In addition to the near Olympic-size outdoor swimming pool, there is a spa and lighted tennis court. The gardens, designed by landscape architect Paul Thiene, include cascading waterfalls and towering trees.

The property is rented for special events. As many as 400 guests have been seated at tables on the terraces and more than 1,000 people have had dinner on the grounds below.

The current owner, an attorney-businessman, bought the property in 1976 for just under $2 million, according to The Agency. The owner has listed it over the years -- the last time at $115 million -- and leased at $600,000 a month.