HOLLYWOOD -- Lilli Palmer, an acclaimed actress whose autobiography chronicling her stormy marriage to actor Rex Harrison became a million-seller, has died at the age of 71.

Friends of the family said Palmer, who underwent a gall bladder operation late last year, died of a heart attack at her home in Los Angeles on Monday. Palmer's second husband, former Argentine actor Carlos Thompson, said services would be private.

Palmer will be seen in her final role in next week's 'Peter The Great' television miniseries.

Palmer was a strikingly beautiful woman with large slightly hooded eyes and a wide emotional range. She began her career on the stage in London in the 1930s and married Harrison in 1939. In the 1940s she moved to the New York stage and to Hollywood.

Among her films were 'Cloak and Dagger' with Gary Cooper in 1945, 'Body and Soul' with John Garfield in 1948, 'The Four Poster' with Harrison in 1952, 'The Pleasure of His Company' with Fred Astaire in 1961, 'The Counterfeit Traitor' with William Holden' in 1952 and 'The Boys From Brazil' with Gregory Peck in 1978.

She was honored with three Golden Globe awards, the Cinema Nuova Gold Plaque of Venice, the Donatello Award of Italy, the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures Award and two television Emmys.

In 'Peter the Great,' a four-part NBC miniseries that begins Sunday, Palmer plays the Russian Czar's mother, Natalya. A network spokesman described her performance as 'beautiful and regal.'

'Lilli was a gracious, lovely lady, a pleasure and a delight to work with, a trooper in every sense of that word,' said producer Marvin Chomsky.

'She held up under the extreme Russian cold and rigors of shooting in the Soviet Union. She was always in good humor and had a smile for everyone. She endured long hours in the makeup chair and never ever complained.'

Palmer was born in Posen, Germany on May 24, 1914, and the family moved to Berlin when she was a toddler.

She later credited Adolf Hitler with her success, saying it was Hitler's anti-Semitic rise to power that forced her father to put her on a train to Paris, where she worked in cabarets, using the acting skills she had learned as a teenager at one of Germany's best repertory companies, the State Theater of Darmstadt..

Her mother was an actress, her father, Dr. Alfred Peiser, chief of surgery at one of Berlin's biggest Jewish hospitals.

Her marriage to Harrison -- then the reigning matinee idol of the British stage -- produced one son, Carey, who became a professor in England. They were divorced in 1957.

'I thought I'd have a fling and it lasted 17 years,' she once said of the stormy marriage. 'He took violent umbrage that I wrote about the breakup of our marriage (in her autobiography, the million-selling 'Change Lobsters and Dance').

'But I was terribly upset. I thought I married for life and that was my bad luck. Things started to go wrong when we went to Hollywood. If I'd been able to drink and had enjoyed all those parties I might still be with him, but I'd be a totally different person.'

Harrison objected to her contention that he married her successor, his third wife, actress Kay Kendall, because he knew Kendall was dying and wanted to bring her happiness.