About Truckin'

Truckin’ magazine is the world’s leading truck publication. Each issue provides you with articles about customizing your truck as well as information about shows and vehicle technology. With the help of your Truckin’ magazine subscription, you will be able to customize your truck any way you like. Order your subscription today!

New and Used Trucks

Every issue of Truckin’ magazine provides you with the latest information about the newest trucks on the market. There are also articles about used trucks that you may want to purchase. The reviews on both categories are thorough and will ensure that you have all the information that you need to make wise purchases. There are also high-quality pictorials in every issue so can see a wide variety of trucks. The pictorials also provide you with the opportunity to get new ideas for how to customize your own truck.

Technology and Projects

A Truckin’ magazine subscription will provide you with numerous articles about the more technical side of truck customization. From tutorial style articles to those about providing a bumper face-lift, there are tons of articles in each issue that you will enjoy. Whether you are looking for something to help you with a specific project or are just browsing for ideas, you will find something interesting to read in every issue. With a subscription to this magazine, you will know all the best things to add to your project truck.

Shows and News

Not only will each Truckin’ magazine subscription provide you with ideas for customizing your truck, but you will also be able to read about all the best events in the world of customized trucks. From reading about the awards and winners at the most recent Truckin’ Throwdown event to reading about races and other events, you will be more informed than ever with the help of this subscription. You will also be able to find out about getting tickets to these events or entering your own vehicle if that interests you.

Order your discount subscription to Truckin’ magazine today to get better customization information each month!