Lily Pons - 2003

Less than a year after she came to the United States from France, Lily Pons made her Metropolitan Opera debut and embarked on a career that would fascinate the press and public for the next 30 years. Pons had one of the great careers of the 20th century, enchanting audiences in the great opera houses of the world with her crystalline voice and charming stage personality.

Pons was also featured in Hollywood blockbusters and performed for U.S. troops overseas. She appeared regularly on magazine covers, and even had a town in Maryland named after her. Though she only played Red Rocks once on July 3, 1952, the amphitheathre has never had an opera legend of her magnitude grace its stage since.

The Beatles - 2003

In 1964, the "Fab Four" embarked on their first North American tour, helping to usher in the "British Invasion" that would soon follow.

"Beatlemania" came to Red Rocks on August 26, 1964, with concert patrons paying $6.60 to attend. Even though this concert is rumored to have been the only stop on their legendary tour not to have sold out, it remains a major highlight in Red Rocks history. The band that started out as small skiffle group from Liverpool, England, went on to become arguably the most popular and influential band in rock and roll history.

The Allman Brothers Band - 2003

The embodiment of 70s Southern Rock, the Allman Brothers Band made its Red Rocks debut on August 4, 1979, and have performed on the Rocks 17 times since. The 1995 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees have a long tradition of blending the new and the old, playing their own classics and putting a fresh new twist on blues standards. Allman Brothers concerts are big Red Rocks events, drawing on one of the most diverse and enthusiastic audiences in music today.

Grateful Dead - 2003

This San Francisco-based group pioneered what is now known as the "hippie jam band" genre and remain head and shoulders above the countless imitators challenging the throne. The Dead's music, which started out as straightforward rock, blues and R&B, has morphed into a hybrid of styles but bears the band's signature of being long, wandering and improvisational.

The Grateful Dead's massive fan base, known as "Deadheads," has packed Red Rocks Amphitheatre over the years to witness the band's famous marathon jams.

Carlos Santana - 2003

Since his breakthrough performance in 1969 at the original Woodstock Festival, iconoclastic leader Carlos Santana introduced the world to his fusion of Afro-Latin rhythms and Rock and Roll music. Santana's career has spanned five decades, always changing, exploring and growning, yet remaining unmistakably Santana.

With a style that remains among the most distinctive ever, Santana is one of the most influential guitar players in rock history. Millions of fans new and old enjoy the work of this extraordinary musician, both through his extensive catalog and his spectacular live shows. Santana made his Red Rocks debut on September 9, 1979, and remains a Red Rocks fan favorite to this day.

Dan Fogelberg - 2003

Over the years, Dan Folgelberg has developed into one of popular music's most gifted and successful singer-songwriters. With a soulful blend of harmonies, an angelic voice and lyrical depth, Fogelberg has captivated his fans since the 1970s.

Fogelberg has played Red Rocks many times since moving to Colorado in the early 1970s, and has made a special connection with the venue and his audiences there. "Because it is so steep, you can actually see people at the very top, and you can make out their features," said Fogelberg. "It's like looking at this huge animated poster. It's like no other place on earth to perform...Red Rocks is in a class by itself."

U2 - 2003

One of the most popular bands in rock music, U2 have captivated audiences with their passionate music since the early 1980s. Though the Irish band have only played Red Rocks once, U2 performed one of the most memorable concerts in Red Rocks history when its rain-soaked and power performance was captured in Under a Blood Red Sky: U2 at Red Rocks.

This landmark 1983 event paved the way for other great artists such as Stevie Nicks, the Moody Blues, John Tesh and Neil Young to record live concert videos at Red Rocks, and helped the Amphitheatre gain its reputation as one of the premier venues in the world.

Stevie Ray Vaughan - 2003

Five-time Grammy winner Stevie Ray Vaughan made his Red Rocks debut on July 8, 1984, as part of an unusual lineup; wedged between New Wave bands Talk Talk and Berlin. The Dallas-born guitar wizard would return to Red Rocks the very next year with his band Double Trouble, and would headline the Rocks four more times before his untimely death in August 1990.

With his virtuoso guitar playing, Stevie Ray Vaughan ignited a blues revival in the 1980s and bridged the gap between blues and rock like no other artist had since the late 1960s.

Sting - 2004

When Sting (a.k.a. Gordon Sumner) left the Police in the early 1980s to record his first solo album, Dream of the Blue Turtles, many felt it would be a short endeavor. In reality it was just the beginning of a tremendously successful solo career that has produced multiple Grammy Award-winning hits that continues to this day.

In 2003, Sting was inducted with his former band, the Police, into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland, and now inducted as a solo artist into the Red Rocks Performers Hall of Fame. Sting's solo debut at Red Rocks was on August 28, 1985, but he was no stranger to the Rocks, having played the venue with the Police on August 23, 1982.

Sting has performed on the rocks several times since then, choosing to play the amphitheatre over other larger venues in the Denver area - a testament to the magic of Red Rocks and to the integrity of the artist.

Bonnie Raitt - 2005

Born into a musical family, it seems Bonnie Raitt was destined to be a famous musician. With a total of 21 shows at Red Rocks under her belt by 2006, Raitt is one of Red Rocks Amphitheatre’s most frequent performers. As a critically acclaimed singer, songwriter and guitarist, Raitt has several multi-platinum albums, as well as a multitude of Grammy's and other music awards. Performing since the early 1970s, she has since become the iconic American musician.

Tom Petty - 2007

Tom Petty first performed at Red Rocks in 1980, remaining a fan favorite ever since. Inspired by Elvis Presley, whom he met when he was 11, Petty has been successful in simultaneously working on solo projects with his band, The Heartbreakers, and with the collaborative band, The Traveling Wilburys. By 2007, he had been nominated for 18 Grammy Awards, as well as earning a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame and an induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

John Denver - 2008

John Denver was an American singer-songwriter, actor, activist and poet. He was one of the most popular acoustic artists of the 1970s in terms of record sales. Denver was born Henry John Deutschendorf Jr., but adopted the surname "Denver" after the capital city of his favorite state, Colorado.

After appearing as a guest on several national television shows, Denver went on to host his own variety/music specials, including several internationally-televised concerts from Red Rocks Amphitheatre. His seasonal special, "Rocky Mountain Christmas," was watched by more than 60 million people, and was the highest-rated show for the ABC network at that time.

In 1977, Denver was named Poet Laureate of Colorado, and by 1989 he had performed at Red Rocks Amphitheatre a total of 16 times.

Blues Traveler - 2010

Blues Traveler are a rock band formed in Princeton, New Jersey in 1987. A mainstream national audience was exposed to Blues Traveler by television host David Letterman, who introduced them as "his favorite band." Blues Traveler have since made more appearances on The Late Show than any other musical artist.

The band's 2003 Independence Day concerts at Red Rocks Amphitheatre were released on the CD Live on the Rocks and the DVD Thinnest of Air, and include Ziggy Marley singing on his father's song "No Woman, No Cry."

You can typically catch Blues Traveler every 4th of July at Red Rocks.

The String Cheese Incident - 2010

The String Cheese Incident came to fruition in 1993 in the city of Boulder, Colorado. The band originally consisted of Billy Nershi, Michael Kang, Michael Travis, Kyle Hollingsworth and Keith Moseley. In 2004, they made the decision to add a second percussionist, Jason Hann. Since then, the band began making a name for themselves in the resorts and mountain towns of Colorado.

The band's fusion of Bluegrass, Funk and Jazz, as well as their ability to improvise music, propelled them to being one of Colorado's top acts to see live. The "Barefoot Boys" made their Red Rocks debut in 2000 as a headliner and began playing multi-night runs the following year in 2001. They have remained a staple for the venue over the years playing multi-night runs.

Big Head Todd and the Monsters - 2010

Big Head Todd and The Monsters are a Blues/Funk outfit from Boulder, Colorado. The band formed in 1986, when three long time friends came together at the University of Colorado, Boulder and decided they wanted to continue their musical friendship. Todd Park Mohr, Rob Squires and Brian Nevin all grew up in southwest Denver and had been playing in bands since their high school days.

The band began to gain a following within the college town almost immediately, and within a few short years they were touring across the U.S. in their trusty van, "The Colonel". In 1991, the band was ready to make their Red Rocks debut, opening for the likes of B.B. King and Buddy Guy.

The band made their first headliner appearance in 1994 with two sold-out shows at Red Rocks.

Jackson Browne - 2016

Beginning his career in the 1970s, Jackson Browne quickly climbed the charts with hit albums like The Pretender and Running On Empty. Browne is also credited with helping co-write the breakthrough hit "Take It Easy" with Eagle's frontman Glenn Frey.

Browne made his Red Rocks debut in 1977 during his Running on Empty tour, and continued to return to the venue in the years following. He has played Red Rocks as a headliner, an opener and as apart of special events such as Telluride on the Rocks. Browne has continued to record albums throughout the years, proving that the music he creates is truly timeless.

Colorado Symphony Orchestra / Denver Symphony Orchestra - 2016

Red Rocks Amphitheatre has been graced with the symphonic sounds of multiple orchestras since the venue's inception. These orchestral performances predate the famous Easter Sunrise Service, having begun in 1941 with the Denver Junior Symphony Orchestra. The Denver Symphony Orchestra (DSO) was the primary orchestra to play on stage at Red Rocks until 1989, when the orchestra disbanded due to contractual issues. The Colorado Symphony Orchestra (CSO) was formed in 1989 in-lieu of the DSO disbandment to give an outlet for the musicians to continue playing professionally.

Both the Denver Symphony Orchestra and the Colorado Symphony Orchestra have played myriad concerts at the amphitheatre, and continue to host concerts to this day. Over the past few decades, the CSO have performed on stage at Red Rocks with popular artists such as Sarah McLachlan, Warren Haynes, Amos Lee and many more. With the CSO acting as the backing band for these artists, music is transformed into grand, orchestral landscapes that allow you to hear the songs in a new light.

Reggae on the Rocks - 2016

Reggae on the Rocks was created in 1988 by Bill Bass Concerts in an attempt to bring the loving, all encompassing genre of reggae to the Rocky Mountains. Classic reggae artists including Jimmy Cliff, Inner Circle, Burning Spear, The Wailers, Ziggy Marley and more have had the pleasure of playing the Reggae on the Rocks event. This spectacle continues to highlight the most coveted artists currently in the scene and those who preceded them.

Jimmy Buffett - 2016

Jimmy Buffett began his career in the early 1970s in Nashville trying to make it as a country singer/songwriter. He would soon discover the wonders of Key West, Florida, while on a busking expedition through the south and southeast. He quickly fell in love with Key West and the laid-back "beach lover" lifestyle that the region adopted over the years.

Buffett gained a large, devoted following throughout the 1970s and 1980s who were given the nickname "Parrot Heads" by one of Buffett's band members in 1985. This nickname was due to fans' dedication of wearing colorful shirts and parrot hats while attending Buffett concerts.

Buffett and his faithful Parrot Heads first embarked upon Red Rocks Amphitheatre on August 19, 1977, and were quickly invited back in the summer of 1979 for two nights. Buffett's shows became an annual event at Red Rocks from 1979 to 1987, playing either one or two nights every summer.

Steve Miller Band - 2017

Formed in late 1960s in San Francisco, Steve Miller Band had their work cut out for them while coming up with the likes of the Grateful Dead, Jefferson Airplane and Big Brother and the Holding Company. The band originally consisted of Steve Miller, Lonnie Turner, James "Curly" Cooke, Tim Davis and Jim Peterman, and has continued to maintain a rotating roster of wonderful musicians throughout the years.

By the early 1970s, Steve Miller Band had quickly proved that they had earned their place in music history, with albums like The Joker, Fly Like An Eagle and Abracadabra. Continuing to gain momentum throughout the 1970s, Steve Miller Band graced the stage at Red Rocks Amphitheatre for the first time in 1982.

The band were invited back to the venue seven years later in 1989 and continued to play the stage a total of eight times through out the 1990s. They revisited in 2005 and have played every other year since.

STS9 - 2017

Georgia based, electro-jazz outfit formerly known as Sector 9 first stepped onto the scene in the late 1990s with their funky, jazzy instrumental album, Interplanetary Escape Vehicle. Sector 9 consisted of Hunter Brown, David Murphy, Jeffree Lerner, David Phipps and Zach Velmer. By the early 2000s, they had modified the name of the act to Sound Tribe Sector 9 and began releasing more albums while hitting the U.S. festival scene, making a name for themselves amongst the jam band community. STS9 made their Red Rocks debut in 2004 as an opener, instantly becoming a fan-favorite.

By 2007, they were headlining their first two-night run. STS9 have performed at Red Rocks every year since 2004, playing multi-night runs almost every summer. Original bass player David Murphy parted ways with the band in 2014, and Alana Rocklin was brought on board to fill in the low end.

Lyle Lovett - 2018

Lyle Lovett began writing music while he was attending Texas A&M in the late 1970s. During his graduate program, Lovett spent some time abroad in Germany, where he continued to write and perform the songs he was creating. While in Germany, he discovered some fellow musicians that would eventually make up the core members of His Large Band.

Lovett brought his work back stateside in the 1980s, quickly gaining the attention of record labels. He eventually signed a contract to begin recording in 1986. His debut album, Lyle Lovett, was released a year later to positive reception within the country music charts. Through the late 1980s, Lovett continued recording and releasing albums, each one appealing to an audience slightly different from the last.

Key musicians for Lyle's Large Band, including singer Francine Reed, guitarist Billy Williams, cellist John Hagen and drummer Russ Kunkel, helped propel the act into the top charts of the 1980s and 1990s. By 1990 Lovett had an ample following with country music fans as well as pop music fans, and was brought to Red Rocks as an opener that same year. Lovett was received so well that he was invited back two years later as a headliner, becoming one of the most sought after shows to see at Red Rocks Amphitheatre.

Michael Franti - 2019

Michael Franti began his illustrious music career in the late 1980s with hip-hop, reggae and funk outfits including the Beatnigs and the Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy. By the early 1990s, Franti had discovered the proper channel with his backing band to help vocalize his social concernment and want for a better world. Some key musicians that contributed to the formative years of the band were bassist Carl Young, drummer Mannars Itiene and guitarists Dave Shul & Charlie Hunter.

After releasing a series of albums with Spearhead, Franti began releasing solo albums in the mid-2000s with Songs from the Front Porch and Kamikaze: The lost Sex Singles & Collectors' Remixes. Franti's ever rising popularity landed him his first Red Rocks show on October 2, 2004, for the "Rescue at the Rocks" event featuring Blues Traveler. After playing two opening time slots in 2005, Michael Franti & Spearhead were invited back for their first headlining gig here on the rocks in 2007 for the "Etown Green Rocks" event.

Franti and company have graced the stage of Red Rocks Amphitheatre a total of 15 times as of 2022, with no plans of slowing down.

Stevie Nicks - 2022

Stevie Nicks joins the Red Rocks Hall of Fame with a series of performances that crosses five decades. A nine-time featured artist on the Red Rocks stage, Nicks first appeared in 1986 during her “Rock A Little” Tour – a tour that saw her film “Live at Red Rocks.” The live show became one of the first, and still biggest, concert videos filmed at the venue and showcased a star-studded back-up band featuring Mick Fleetwood on drums and Peter Frampton on guitar. The DVD went gold in territories around the world and showcased Red Rocks to millions of new fans.

Nicks first gained fame as a member of legendary rock band Fleetwood Mac and then as a solo artist with 1981’s “Bella Donna.” She is the first woman to be inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame as both a member of a group and solo artist.

James Taylor - 2024

Six-time Grammy Award Winner and Red Rocks Hall of Fame inductee James Taylor shot to stardom in 1971 with his timeless recording of “You’ve Got a Friend,” with other Top 10 hits like "Fire and Rain," "Handy Man" and "How Sweet It Is (To Be Loved by You).” His first appearance at Red Rocks came a handful of years later on July 27, 1975, quickly returning the next year as Red Rocks reopened to rock and roll music after a city-imposed ban on the genre was thrown out in court.

Taylor’s Red Rocks appearances now span six decades, his popularity bolstered by two-night runs in 2003, 2008, 2012, 2014 and 2024, all of which were sellouts.