Scooby-Doo: Pirates Ahoy! (2006)

Movie Review by Debbie Winkler

Starring: Casey Kasem, Frank Welker, Mindy Cohn, Grey DeLisle, Dan Castellaneta

Director: Chuck Sheetz

Series: a Scooby Doo Movie

Release Date: 16 September 2006

Language: English

Length: 80 minutes

Movie Rating: Not Rated

View Format: DVD

My Rating: 3/5 stars

Related Reviews: Scooby-Doo and the Cyber Chase; Scooby-Doo in Where’s My Mummy?; Scooby-Doo and the Loch Ness Monster; Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders

Synopsis:

“When Scooby-Doo and his crime-solving pals hit the high seas on a cruise through the Bermuda Triangle, strange things start happening all around them – and at the center of it all is an unexplained ghostly pirate ship manned by skeletons. It seems the undead sailors like to take aim at passing vessels, making the gang’s cruise ship a prime target! Can Velma (voiced by Mindy Cohn), Daphne (voiced by Grey DeLisle), Fred (voiced by Frank Welker), Shaggy (voiced by Casey Kasem) and Scooby (voiced by Frank Welker) solve the mystery before they turn up missing?” — Netflix.com

Review:

This is another silly, zany adventure in the Scooby Doo series! I think that this movie was rushed to completion to capitalize on the popularity of pirates due to the blockbuster Pirates of the Caribbean movies and, unfortunately, it shows. This caused them to cut a few corners and to make the movie just okay instead of something fun and memorable. Kids will still have a great time watching the crazy antics of Scooby and the gang, but adults will not find as much to enjoy in this movie. The animation is crafted in the updated style we have seen in recent Scooby Doo movies and the style is solid, but nothing particularly remarkable. The drawings are simplistic and filled in with solid color blocks to appeal to younger viewers and keep everything looking bright and cheerful – even during some of the scarier sequences!

Younger viewers will get a good laugh out of all of the over-the-top jokes in this movie. Fred’s parents surprise the entire gang with a Mystery Cruise for Fred’s birthday, but, of course, the gang easily solve every mystery that the crew can throw at them. This was actually a fun sequence to watch for Scooby Doo fans as they bring back several classic costumes and monsters. I found it a pretty fun trip down memory lane. Unfortunately, I felt like the mystery was both easy to solve and a complete surprise. I quickly figured out where the pirate crews came from and thought that I knew who the bad guy was, but discovered that there was more than one villain in this movie! Regardless of whether you enjoy guessing the villain’s identity in these movies or not, you will probably be shaking your head at the weird, far-fetched solution to the mystery in this film. They combine pirates searching for treasure in the Bermuda Triangle with aliens and powerful asteroids and it just wasn’t a good match for me. I wish that they had stuck with the traditional pirates and buried treasure storyline and not complicate it with zombies, high-tech gadgets, alien influences, and more. The story was very muddled and didn’t really work for me.

Even though this is not a great Scooby Doo movie, fans of the characters will still watch and enjoy this movie. I found lots of moments that made me smile and so I can recommend this movie for adults, though it is clearly geared towards a younger audience. There are several lines that Fred and the gang exchange with Fred’s parents that are a real hoot! Also, the pirate crew has some wonderful scenes that will sweep you away to days gone by. Oh, and for those of you who think that there are going to be real pirates in this movie, you will be disappointed. This movie goes back to the classic Scooby episodes where everything is fake and all of the villains are bad guys in masks. If you are looking for one of the new Scooby Doo movies to watch to see if you will enjoy them, this isn’t the one you should watch first. If you are a die hard Scooby fan, you will have a fun time with this, but go into it with low expectations so you are not disappointed!

Content:

This movie has some scenes of mild peril and cartoony violence. There are a few dark and stormy scenes where younger viewers might be a bit scared, especially when the thunder and lightning chases across the screen and the pirates come in to view. Most of the bad guys are shown in a silly, goofy light so nothing is too scary. Recommended for ages 3 and up.