Brandon Fried, the drummer of The Neighbourhood, has been ousted from the rock band after singer María Zardoya accused him of groping her on Friday night.

The band's decision came in response to Zardoya's allegations that the musician, 32, touched her inappropriately 'under the table' at a bar.

'It was one of the most uncomfortable things I’ve ever experienced. I felt an invasion of my space, privacy and body,' she wrote on her Instagram Story. 'Ya’ll need a new drummer, this guy is a complete creep.'

Within 24 hours of the lead vocalist of The Marías' post, The Neighbourhood made the decision to part ways with Fried.

'We arto María for coming forward. We have zero tolerance for any kind of inappropriate behavior towards women. As a result of Brandon’s actions, he will no longer be a member of the Neighbourhoood,' the group explained.

Fried did not deny Zardoya's clams, and has issued a public apology to the indie pop singer.

'I am so terribly sorry to María. My actions were inexcusable and intolerable. They are not reflective of who I am as a person, but clearly a reflection of who I become while under the influence,' he wrote on his Instagram Story.

He continued: 'It is evident that I must address my problems with alcohol and substance abuse, which I am now seeking help for.'

'I want to apologize to women who have been victims of any behavior that has left them feeling uncomfortable or violated. I am also sorry to the Neighbourhood and our fans for letting them down,' Fried concluded.

DailyMail.com has reached out to The Neighbourhood's representatives, but have not heard back yet.

Fried's firing comes as the band recently received a small surge in popularity after its lead singer Jesse Rutherford began dating Billie Eilish.

Amid rumors of their romance, social media began simmering with backlash against their 11-year age difference, especially since she was a minor when they met.

On December 18, 2017 a Jesse Rutherford fan account tweeted pictures of Billie and Jesse playfully posing up at a costume party together.

The tweet, which has resurfaced via TMZ, was originally posted on Billie's 16th birthday when Jesse was 26 years old.

Billie, who has a reputation for being assiduously tight-lipped about her love life, and Jesse opted to poke fun about their age difference by dressing as a baby and old man for Halloween this year.

Earlier this month, the couple made their red carpet debut at the LACMA Art+Film Gala in Los Angeles.