It's 1948 in a small plantation community deep in the heart of Cajun country, and an innocent black man caught in the wrong place at the wrong time is found guilty of murder and sentenced to the electric chair.

This disturbing travesty of justice is the springboard for Romulus Linney's intense drama "A Lesson Before Dying" -- a tautly structured adaptation of

of the same name. Receiving a riveting production from a strong company directed by Kevin E. Jones, this play is the newest entry in

's 15th anniversary retrospective season.

In Linney's drama, as in Gaines' novel, the unwitting victim of the breakdown of justice, Jefferson (Harold Warren), is not only condemned to die but also has been stripped of all vestiges of self-respect. We learn that during his trial, Jefferson's defense attorney pleaded his client's innocence but finally claimed that even if he were held guilty, putting such an ignorant creature to death would be like electrocuting a hog. Hearing himself described as a beast crushes Jefferson's sense of his own humanity. Called a hog, he sees himself as a hog.

"A Lesson Before Dying"

When:

7:30 Wednesday-Saturdays, 2 p.m. Sundays through March 25

Where:

Theater! Theatre!

Tickets:

$16-$30; 503-242-0080,

In the hope of offsetting this degrading characterization and to prepare Jefferson to die as a man, his godmother turns to the university-educated plantation school teacher Grant Wiggins (Carl Kennedy). Wiggins reluctantly agrees to teach Jefferson to be a man, but it's soon apparent that he, too, has been emasculated by social conditions. He feels defeated by the constant demeaning which he experiences at the hands of the dominant white society and frustrated by the provinciality of the narrow religious preoccupations of his black plantation community.

Initially, Grant believes that the only way he can avoid being trodden down or broken is to flee his community. It is ironic then but not surprising that in assisting Jefferson to find his humanity, Grant discovers the strength he needs to go on as a teacher in rural Louisiana.

The complex psychological journeys that these two characters undergo are evocatively drawn by the actors playing the roles. Kennedy gives us an intriguingly nuanced performance as Grant. Early on, an angry, impatient arrogance underlies most of Grant's interactions with those around him (even though such attitudes are carefully if only barely restrained when dealing with the white characters who hold the reins of power), and yet there is an ease when he deals with his girlfriend, Vivian Baptiste (played with an earnestness spiced with a glowingly affectionate humor by Andrea White).

As Kennedy's Grant becomes more entangled with Jefferson, he is subtly transformed; the growing warmth of Kennedy's interpretation of Grant's relationship with Jefferson slowly penetrates his relations with others. This change is most apparent in scenes when Kennedy's Grant directly addresses the audience as his student charges. Here his harsh unmitigated impatience is more and more frequently punctuated by moments of compassionate understanding.

In the role of Jefferson, Warren skillfully tracks the stumbling, stuttering efforts of this wounded character as he frees himself from stubborn silence and explosive rage. He literally rises from the helplessness of a doubled-over and rocking broken creature at the start of the play to the straight-standing gentle grace with which he holds himself at the end.

The play is performed in the round with minimal scenery, including a simple wooden table and bench, several wooden folding chairs and a couple of small crates. Images projected on the side walls of the theater help to establish a sense of place and mood, but it is the supporting actors who most effectively convey a feel for the social environment in which the action transpires.

The dynamics of the surrounding white world appear through Stephan Henry's Sheriff Sam Guidry and Dennis Kelly's Paul Bonin. Henry's sheriff exemplifies the callous manipulations of white power without falling too far into redneck caricature while Kelly portrays a deputy whose cold, distant façade gradually gives way to true human sympathy as the tragedy plays itself out.

Brenda Phillips as Jefferson's godmother Emma Glenn and Jerry Foster in the role of the Rev. Moses Ambrose bring the life of the black plantation community into perspective. Phillips' Emma represents the well-meaning, deeply devout religious matriarchal dimensions of the plantation community as Foster's Reverend Ambrose embodies the unrelenting religious conservatism of the community. While Phillips and Foster sketch out the parameters of the community which stifle Grant, both actors clearly communicate the real compassion that drives these characters.

Finally what the play leaves us with is compassion. As Warren's Jefferson stands tall in the play's last moments, we are reminded that his victory is a victory for the dignity that we must embrace in all our fellow humans.

-