Made In Reading Films

The Stakeout Director: Federico Castelluccio Runtime: 6:24 minutes Two detectives, one Cuban and one Italian, on a late night stakeout argue about the best mob movie of all time. website Righteous Sunday Director: David Speace Runtime: 7:14 minutes Righteous Sunday is a poem written by Greg Gaul. The poem reveals the true inhumanity of racism …

Shorts Block Remix

I’ll Meet You There Director: Karl Fernandez Runtime: 14:46 minutes A man recounts a trip to his late wife’s childhood home as they prepare for the future. watch trailer Wistful Pieces Director: Ellany Kincross Runtime: 18:03 minutes Nick and Nadia are a successful couple in their 40’s who have been married for 12 years. Their …

Shorts Films from Here to There

Let Tonight Pass Director: Hamed Ghasemi Runtime: 18 minutes Elham is an English teacher who is from a traditional family. Tonight is a very special night for her family. Her suitor will come to their home with his own family. She’s been recently in a photo shoot as the model for an underground agency. Now …

Inspirational Docs

No Time to Waste Director: Carl Bidleman Runtime: 51:47 minutes No Time to Waste celebrates legendary 98-year-old park ranger Betty Reid Soskin’s inspiring life, work and urgent mission to restore critical missing chapters of America’s story. The film follows her journey as an African American woman presenting her personal story from a kitchen stool in …

Women & Politics

Can You Hear Us Now? Director: Jim Cricchi Runtime: 87 minutes Small-town activism. Nail-biting elections. A last-minute power grab. In Wisconsin, where extreme partisanship has become the norm, voters are finding their lives increasingly irrelevant to state lawmakers. Through the stories of four tireless women fighting to have their voices heard, CAN YOU HEAR US …

Women on Both Sides of the Camera

Women on Both Sides of the Camera Director: Mahshad Afshar Runtime: 95 minutes Benefiting from a wide range of rare archive materials, this feature-length documentary focuses on one century of the representation of women in Iranian cinema. Looking at the formation of the Iranian film industry and its relationship with socio-political events, the film narrates …

Documenting Art

Voice of Selma Director: Roya Iravani Runtime: 30 minutes The Voice of Selma (Moghaddam Museum) Project is a feature-length documentary film that guides us through the treasures collected over a lifetime of work by Selma Moghaddam and her husband Mohsen. Against a backdrop of government hostility toward Persian works of art that predate the Islamic …

Tackling Politics

We Are All in this Together Director: Daniel Troia Runtime: 70 minutes During divisive times in America, a man sets off on a cross-country bicycle journey, with no food, no money, and the hope of gaining a better understanding of the human connection. website Vitriol Director: Mark Clauburg Runtime: 25 minutes A short documentary exploring …

Iranian Short Films

Goodbye Olympic Director: Mojtaba poorbakhsh Runtime: 18:37 minutes Maria is a girl whom she is a champion of Kayak; she is waiting for dispatching to the Olympics Qualification which held in France. The schedule of dispatching the kayaking team will be called off because of some troubles. Synthesis Director: Mohammad Towrivarian Runtime: 15 minutes A …