Taking to the Belgrade’s Main Stage this autumn are six sensational live tribute acts.

The shows celebrate music from a range of eras and genres – from rock and roll hits to classic pop songs, audiences are invited to experience the sounds of Dolly Parton, The Beatles and more.

Steve Steinman’s rock and roll spectacle returns to the Belgrade in the sequel Vampires Rock – Ghost Train on Halloween evening, Tuesday, October 31.

Combining with special effects, energetic dance routines and fire routines, the show features rock anthems including Meat Loaf, Queen, AC/DC and Guns n’ Roses.

Celebrating classic country music, Islands in the Stream pays homage to Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton on Wednesday, November 1.

Fusing Dolly’s glamour and Kenny’s charisma, the concert recreates country favourites such as Jolene, Ruby, Here You Come Again, I Will Always Love You, Coward of the Country, plus the smash-hit Islands in the Stream.

Marking the 50th anniversary of Yesterday, The Magic of the Beatles honours the golden era of the globally renowned group on Thursday, November 2.

From Love Me Do to Let It Be, the show journeys through The Beatles’ Mop Top roots to the psychedelia of Sgt Pepper and beyond.

Europe’s ultimate 1980s multi-tribute concert 80s Mania takes the stage on Friday, November 3.

More than 30 chart topping tunes will be refashioned, featuring tributes to Duran Duran, Kim Wilde, Culture Club, Madonna, Wham!, Nena, Toni Basil, Bananarama, Dead or Alive, Madness as well as many others.

Rockin’ & Rollin with Laughter takes the stage on Saturday, November 4. Mixing live Merseybeat music from the ’60s and ’70s with scouse comedy, the show takes inspiration from TV classics including Opportunity Knocks, New Faces and Ready Steady Go. Features music from Beryl Marsden, Mick Miller, The Merseys, and a special tribute to Cilla Black.

Variety gala Midday Variety returns with Golden Greats on Friday, November 10. Entertainers Anita Harris and Freddie ‘Parrotface’ Davies will be supported by multi-instrumentalist David Conway, singers Helen Farrell and Chris Ritchie, with musical direction from the Martyn St James Band.