Celebrating the queen and king of country, Dolly Parton and Kenny Rogers, a brand-new stage show Islands in the Stream is coming to Coventry.

Stacked with million-selling country music hits like Jolene, Ruby, 9 to 5, Lucille, I Will Always Love You, Here You Come Again, The Gambler, Coward of the County, Love is Like a Butterfly and Lady, Coventry theatregoers are invited to enjoy awesome vocals and gentle humour.

Dolly and Kenny’s legendary live spectaculars will be on display at the production, which is set to grace the Belgrade Theatre on September 20, says show producer Michael Taylor.

“Bring-the-house-down performances, a superb score and supreme musicianship tell the story of the simple Smoky Mountains farm girl’s rise to country music’s biggest superstar,” says Michael.

Underlining the cast’s dedication to mastering the sound of the original artistes, the performers and band have recorded an album of original songs in the style of Dolly Parton.

Islands in the Stream even features the lead track from the release, the song slotting in seamlessly between all the million-selling Dolly and Kenny favourites featured in the production’s hit-packed score.

The performance is quite literally tightly stitched together – three of the outfits worn by the night’s female lead are exact replicas of Dolly’s iconic outfits, custom-made for the show.

“The star of the show is a master of stage craft,” says Michael. “Dolly’s unmistakable phrasing is closely reproduced, bringing Miss Parton’s distinctive vocals and loveable personality to life.”

As seen on national TV, the evening’s Dolly is joined by a Stars in Their Eyes winner.

The night’s Kenny Rogers’ own solo show has been seen from Orkney to the Isle of Wight, Dubai to St Lucia and all points in between.

Highlights of his faithfully authentic depiction of the king of country are renditions of The Gambler, Lucille and Coward of the County.

“Both leads revel in Dolly and Kenny’s famed warmth and humour,” says Michael, “making Islands in the Stream a delightful evening of song and audience interaction."

Ticket prices vary between £18.50 - £25.75 for the production, which takes place at the Belgrade Theatre, in Coventry, on September 20.