After volunteering with Collective Aid projects in Calais, Belgrade, and Subotica over the past six months, I have taken on the role of distribution coordinator in northern Serbia. The Subotica project distributes food, clothing, hygiene and shelter as well as providing mobile showers, laundry services and drinking water to people on the move seeking a better life in Europe. To read more about the conditions and border violence in northern Serbia, see our advocacy report published in collaboration with other NGOs working on the ground. Please consider supporting our work through sharing our advocacy publications or donating to help us continue to provide essential aid to those living at the border.

Welcome Aboard Amazon Web Services (AWS)! We are still buzzing from the appearance of our Literacy Coordinator on the Late Late show! AND we are delighted to announce that AWS is on board to get more Dolly Parton Imagination Library books into the hands of more children 🎉 In 2022, through AWS InCommunities support we will deliver 42,000 books to children in Tallaght alone. AND, we will expand CDI’s Doodle Families literacy programme into new communities in Meath and Dublin! THANK YOU Amazon Web Services (AWS) 🤩 #awsincommunities #imaginationlibrary #everychild #doodlefamilies

CDI is seeking an individual or group of individuals to develop an 8-week STEAM programme for parents and their children. You can find the full job description and application information on our website: https://lnkd.in/gEuq7vi #CDILiteracy

Interested in engaging with Dads and promoting the benefit of involved and engaged Fatherhood? Join us for the online launch of our Being Dad Project – A qualitative, in-depth exploration of fatherhood, capturing Fathers’ voices on the hopes and struggles of fatherhood. 10am - 11:30am, Thursday 30th September 2021. To book your place please visit: https://lnkd.in/dp2dZ7br #BeingDad

Under the Government’s Area Based Childhood Programme (ABC), the Childhood Development Initiative (CDI) are recruiting a Staff Grade Speech and Language Therapist to support the development and implementation of CDI’s work to improve outcomes for children. This is an exciting opportunity to deliver early intervention and prevention services and work with small case loads in community settings. For more information, and to view the entire job description visit: https://lnkd.in/eJq2a3R Please apply with current CV, Application Form, and Cover Letter via email to: Holly@cdi.ie Closing date for applications is 5pm, Thursday 1st July 2021. Interviews to take place week commencing 12th July 2021. Note: Only applications with a CV, Application Form, and Cover Letter will be considered. #wearehiring #SLT #speechandlanguagetherapy