STRICTLY Come Dancing’s Anita Dobson is waltzing all the way to Coventry to play screen legend Joan Crawford.

She will be starring on the Belgrade Theatre stage next year in Bette And Joan alongside Greta Scacchi as Bette Davis.

The new comedy, which runs from May 14, exposes the infamous and long-running feud that developed between the Hollywood stars and came to a head during the filming of cult 1962 film Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?

It marks a return to the stage for Anita. She was the original landlady of EastEnder pub the Queen Vic and first shot to fame playing Angie Watts.

A staggering 30 million people tuned in to see Angie receive divorce papers from Dirty Den on Christmas Day 1985 and the TV special still holds the record as the highest rating soap episode in history.

The Olivier-nominated actress has recently appeared on stage in Hamlet and Calendar Girls, but is currently being watched by millions every Saturday night in BBC 1’s Strictly Come Dancing.

“All my life I’ve wanted to learn to ballroom dance,” says 62-year-old Anita. “I’ve always had huge respect for dancers and it’s one of my biggest regrets that I didn’t train. I’m completely terrified of course but decided it was time to do it anyway. Time to go for it!”

Dancing has been a new challenge for Anita, but she and her professional partner Robin Windsor have been shining through.

“I’m an actor, a wordsmith, and I work with words rather than anything physical,” she says. “But this sort of thing exposes you much more as yourself.”

Anita is married to Queen guitarist Brian May, but says she leaves the musical choices for their Saturday night dances to Robin.

“I like music that is evocative of different styles, I think that’s more important than just picking a pop song,” she says, “but all those decisions are just down to my professional partner!”

Other highlights in the Belgrade Theatre’s new season include West End hit Yes, Prime Minister, The Rat Pack Is Back, Motown’s Greatest Hits – How Sweet It Is, Hold Back The Night and The Dolly Parton Story. Tickets go on sale today.