Image 17.jpg

Beatrice Welles and her father, Orson Welles, at the Feria de Sevilla in Spain during April 1964 (Agencia Grafica Prensa Lara, Madrid). The photo is one of many new items donated by Beatrice Welles to UM's Library Screen Arts Mavericks & Makers collection, a popular archive highlighting visionaries in the genre of independent film. Image courtesy the University of Michigan Library, Special Collections.

ANN ARBOR, MI - The University of Michigan is now the most comprehensive resource for fans and scholars of renowned filmmaker Orson Welles following the acquisition of never-before-seen work given by his daughter, Beatrice Welles.

A plethora of new documents and photos from her portion of her father's estate will join the UM Library's Screen Arts Mavericks & Makers collection, an archive highlighting visionaries in independent film.

"I'm really happy that his materials will go to Michigan as a complement to what is already there," Beatrice Welles said in a news release. "Part of my job is to protect my father's legacy and to leave this information in good hands. I also think it is important to try to keep his things together -- since he lived and traveled all over the world, so many of these items were never in one place at any point in his life."

Archivists have received approximately 21 linear feet of new material that unveils a portion of Orson Welles' life and career that few have ever had access to. UM welcomed the first addition to the Welles archive in 2005.

It has since grown to become the most extensive international collection of items and materials that span Welles' life and career, totaling nearly 100 linear feet, including thousands of documents, letters, telegrams, scripts, production and financial statements, photographs, illustrations and audiovisual materials.

Orson Welles, who died in 1985 at age 70, is best remembered for his work in radio, theater, television and film, including his 1938 broadcast of H.G. Wells' "The War of the Worlds" and 1941 film "Citizen Kane," which he co-wrote, produced, directed and starred in.

The new collection from Beatrice Welles contains more than 70 scripts for film, television and stage, many completed but never brought into production. Included among the collection are handwritten scripts for several films Welles worked on in the 1950s and 1960s, including "Othello," "Mr. Arkadin" and "Chimes at Midnight."

Other notable highlights include an annotated script for "Fountain of Youth," a 1956 television pilot produced by Desilu Productions, a company co-owned by Desi Arnaz and Lucille Ball. The pilot was completed, but never broadcast.

The collection also includes a number of scrapbooks and news clippings detailing the press Welles received throughout his career. Several volumes alone chronicle coverage of "Citizen Kane" representing a five-month period of time following its release.

In addition to the scripts, other items of note included in the collection are family photographs, letters and telegrams.

The Welles collection can be found within UM's Screen Arts Mavericks & Makers archive, which also includes materials from Robert Altman, Ira Deutchman, Alan Rudolph, Nancy Savoca and John Sayles.