The world's most comprehensive Orson Welles archive has just gotten larger.

A new set of materials from the filmmaker's daughter, Beatrice Welles, including more than 70 TV, film and stage scripts, has been added to the University of Michigan Library's Screen Arts Mavericks & Makers collection.

The items include photos, letters and personal correspondence — much of which has never been publicly seen.

"The majority of it was unpublished work he did, mostly in the '50s and '60s," Philip Hallman, curator of the Mavericks & Makers collection, said. "We have the largest collection of Orson Welles archival papers already, but this is a period we didn’t have as much from. This is a great puzzle piece that sort of finishes the puzzle."

The acquisition was partly a gift and partly a purchase, he said. He would not disclose the price.

There are 21 linear feet of materials — which Hallman estimates as "thousands" of individual items.

Hallman said that even though Orson Welles was generally anti-establishment — he didn't send his daughter to school when she was a child, for example — the idea that students could learn from his work appealed to his daughter.

"We’ve been able to introduce Welles to a new generation of students," Hallman said. "Many of them have really taken to him and his work because they have access to this archive."

In a news release, Beatrice Welles, 61, said: "I'm really happy that his materials will go to Michigan as a complement to what is already there. Part of my job is to protect my father's legacy and to leave this information in good hands.

"It is important to try to keep his things together — since he lived and traveled all over the world, so many of these items were never in one place at any point in his life."

Orson Welles, who died in 1985 at age 70, is known for his innovative work in radio, theater, TV and film, including his legendary 1938 broadcast of H.G. Wells' "The War of the Worlds," and his 1941 hit film "Citizen Kane."

Hallman connected with Beatrice Welles through a person who runs an Orson Welles fan website. He visited her last year at her home in Arizona.

The daughter of Orson Welles and Italian actress Paola Mori, Beatrice Welles' childhood included jet-setting to different countries, playing on film sets and interacting mostly with adults.

"My father was very anti-establishment, so I didn't spend my days in school. I was with my parents 24/7, — we were inseparable, and we really lived our lives around his creative schedule," she said in the news release. "Something that a lot of people don't know about him is that he was always creating, always curious, always onto a new idea."

The U-M Library's Screen Arts Mavericks & Makers collection is a popular archive highlighting visionaries in the genre of independent film. It can be accessed in the reading room of the Hatcher Graduate Library.

Hallman said the new Welles materials are still being processed, so it will be several months before they are available to the public.

Contact Ann Zaniewski: 313-222-6594 or azaniewski@freepress.com. Follow her on Twitter: @AnnZaniewski.