The article presents the fate of Polish Duke Casimir I the Restorer and Maria Dobroniega of Kiev’s only daughter - Świętosława of Poland. Lack of available resources caused the paper to hypothetically describe her birth, marriage with the... more

The article presents the fate of Polish Duke Casimir I the Restorer and Maria Dobroniega of Kiev’s

only daughter - Świętosława of Poland. Lack of available resources caused the paper to hypothetically

describe her birth, marriage with the ruler of Bohemian dukedom, inevitable influence on her sons, her

role in husband’s country and circumstances of death. Moreover, the paper tries to localize the bride

price paid to Świętosława by Vratislaus II of Bohemia.

The article deals with the emergence of the Slavic ethnic identity in the territory of Ancient Rus’. While seeking for a (hypothetical) answer to this question, the author focuses on contacts that existed during the 10th century between... more

The article deals with the emergence of the Slavic ethnic identity in the territory of Ancient Rus’. While seeking for a (hypothetical) answer to this question, the author focuses on contacts that existed during the 10th century between Kiev and the empire of the Přemyslids, in which the Slavic identity was inherited from Great Moravia. According to the author, the Slavic identity could penetrate into Kiev (from which it later came to Novgorod) from the Přemyslid realm via the well-known trade route that in the 10th century connected centres of Western and Central Europe with Kiev, Volga Bulgaria, and Khazaria. In doing so, the author attributes the leading role in the contacts of Kiev with Central Europe to the tribe of Lendians (Lendzaninoi / Lędzianie) mentioned in the Byzantine emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus’s treatise “De administrando imperio” (mid-10th century). In the author’s opinion, the Lendians were not only closely connected with the realm the Přemyslids, but also controlled Plisněsk, an important political and trade center, through which contacts between Slavic-speaking communities of Central Europe and the Middle Dnieper region were made. According to the author, of all the Slavic-speaking communities that had close contacts with the Russes, the Lendians were most capable for embracing the group name Slověne due to the supralocal nature of their group identity and the possible influence of the Moravian (Olomouc) bishopric. While stressing that the emergence in Kiev and Novgorod of new non-tribal group names, including that of Slověne, was conditioned by changes in the social and cultural habitus of the Slavic-speaking population, which concentrated in the corresponding loci, the author expresses the idea that it was the Lendians who were the key link in the spread from west to east of the the Přemyslid realm’s (“Prague empire”’s) “social knowledge”, which contributed to the adoption of the Slavic identity in Eastern Europe.

The authenticity of the so-called Christian’s legend was one of the most debated issues in Czech historiography from the late eighteenth century onwards. The legend tells the Lives of St. Wenceslas and St. Ludmila in a broad historical... more

The authenticity of the so-called Christian’s legend was one of the most

debated issues in Czech historiography from the late eighteenth century onwards. The legend tells the Lives of St. Wenceslas and St. Ludmila in a broad historical context and claims to have been written at the end of the tenth century. For a long time scholars felt the need to write a history of this debate; however, not much more than an overview of previous literature, written from a certain standpoint, has been given until now.

This paper deals with one aspect of this debate, namely, the image of Christianus monachus in the works of different scholars, who were especially active in this discussion. I distinguish three elements which constitute this image: 1) the author of the legend 2) the historical figure, the son of a nobleman, from the circle of St. Adalbert of Prague 3) the image of Strachkvas as given in the Chronicle of Cosmas of Prague. This allows an analysis of how the images of medieval Bohemian history created by different scholars were influenced by their reading of Christian’s legend, and how this reading influenced their dating of the legend. It was mainly aesthetic preferences which determined the dating of the legend and the choice of proof. The analysis of the legend was made more difficult by the existence of two other images connected with its author; scholars solved this problem in different manners. In the last few decades all three sides of Christianus monachus were united and the authenticity of Christian’s legend has been recognized.

The authors deal with the issues of the beginnings of the parish system in the Czech lands, which formed the prerequisites for a deeper Christianisation of the rural milieu. Based on the distinctive transformations in burials observable... more

The authors deal with the issues of the beginnings of the parish system in the Czech lands, which formed the prerequisites for a deeper Christianisation of the rural milieu. Based on the distinctive transformations in burials observable in a large part of Bohemia and Moravia, they place the beginnings in the period around 1100 A. D. The evidence of the archaeological sources is confronted with

the testimony of the written evidence and critically also with the conception of art historians, who do not suppose a boom of sacral architecture in the rural milieu until the second half of the 12th century and later. The shift of the beginnings of parish organisation further into the past opens a number of historical and methodological questions.

Benedictine convent of St. George at the Prague Castle is the oldest monastery in Czech countries. It had survived about seventy manuscripts from cloister´s library. They have been nowadays mostly deposited in the National Library of the... more

Benedictine convent of St. George at the Prague Castle is the oldest monastery in Czech countries. It had survived about seventy manuscripts from cloister´s library. They have been nowadays mostly deposited in the National Library of the Czech Republic. Twenty of them, mostly from the 13th and 14th Century, have calendars. There are many annotations in it, some of them necrological. It was noted scribes of calendars, as well as necrological notes. It is also possible, that some of them could be written by nuns. It has been recognized many names of nuns, canons, founders and benefactors (and many other persons). It was also possible to reconstruct and rebuild cloister´s history. This thesis, finished in 2004, contains descriptions of each manuscript, calendar, necrological note and personalities connected with Benedictine convent of St. George. The list of literature was also fitted.

Klášter benediktinek u sv. Jiří na Pražském hradě je nejstarším v Čechách vzniklým klášterem. Patřil mezi nejvýznamnější a nejbohatší církevní instituce v českých zemích. Z původní klášterní knihovny se dochovalo vice jak sedmdesát rukopisů. Obvyklý repertoár tvoří liturgika. Ve dvaceti rukopisech byly vevázány různě staré kalendáře (vesměs z 13.-14. století). Cílem diplomové práce, ukončené v roce 2004, bylo podrobně prozkoumat nekrologické přípisky, vpisované od písařů a příležitostně též sester, do uvedených kalendářů. Podařilo se postupně identifikovat jednotlivé písařské ruce. V mnohých případech bylo uvedené jméno ztotožněno s konkrétní osobu sestry, kanovníka, zakladatele či “dobrodince” kláštera. Zároveň byly značně rozšířeny dosud kusé dějiny tohoto kláštera. Součástí práce byly podrobné popisy jednotlivých nekrologických přípisů, písařských rukou a jednotlivých osobností písařů a připomínaných osob. Nedílnou součást tvoří podrobný a obsáhlý seznam pramenů a literatury.

The authors deal with the issues of the beginnings of the parish system in the Czech lands, which formed the prerequisites for a deeper Christianisation of the rural milieu. Based on the distinctive transformations in burials observable... more

The authors deal with the issues of the beginnings of the parish system in the Czech lands, which formed the prerequisites for a deeper Christianisation of the rural milieu. Based on the distinctive transformations in burials observable in a large part of Bohemia and Moravia, they place the beginnings in the period around 1100 A. D. The evidence of the archaeological sources is confronted with the testimony of the written evidence and critically also with the conception of art historians, who do not suppose a boom of sacral architecture in the rural milieu until the second half of the 12th century and later. The shift of the beginnings of parish organisation further into the past opens a number of historical and methodological questions.

Summary: The St. Wenceslas helmet is a real combat property, armored by Prince Wenceslas, probably inspired by the image of the holy Trinity. The risen Christ resting in the arms of the Father, the Holy Spirit as a dove. God the Father is... more

Summary:

The St. Wenceslas helmet is a real combat property, armored by Prince Wenceslas, probably inspired by the image of the holy Trinity. The risen Christ resting in the arms of the Father, the Holy Spirit as a dove. God the Father is shown with hands holding Christ under his arm and never sleeping God's eye on Christ's chest. The image is distinctly in Byzantine style, dressed with Christ, with a cingulum of military King Christ. There are two Iroskot braids in the form of CHIRHO - XP in the picture. The shape of the hatch is a picture of the ravena - raven of Viking mythology, the image of the Trinity is inscribed in it secondary. The helmet today is the whole modified by retrofitting the bumper to the opposite side, due to damage to the helmet calotte.

I apologize for the automatic translation.

Résumé:

Le casque de St. Wenceslas est une véritable propriété de combat, blindée par le prince Wenceslas, probablement inspirée par l'image de la Sainte Trinité. Le Christ ressuscité reposant dans les bras du Père, le Saint-Esprit comme une colombe. Dieu le Père est montré avec des mains tenant le Christ sous son bras et ne dormant jamais les yeux de Dieu sur la poitrine de Christ. L'image est distinctement dans le style byzantin, habillé avec le Christ, avec un cingulum du roi militaire Christ. Il y a deux tresses Iroskot sous la forme de CHIRHO - XP dans l'image. La forme de la trappe est une image du ravena - corbeau de la mythologie viking, l'image de la Trinité y est inscrite secondaire. Le casque d'aujourd'hui est le tout modifié en réaménageant le pare-chocs du côté opposé, en raison de dommages à la calotte du casque.

Je m'excuse pour la traduction automatique.

Podsumowanie:

Kask św. Wacława jest prawdziwą własnością bojową, opancerzoną przez księcia Wacława, prawdopodobnie inspirowaną obrazem świętej Trójcy. Zmartwychwstały Chrystus odpoczywający w ramionach Ojca, Duch Święty jako gołębica. Bóg Ojciec jest pokazany z rękami trzymającymi Chrystusa pod pachą i nigdy nie spaniającym Bożym okiem na piersi Chrystusa. Obraz jest wyraźnie w stylu bizantyjskim, ubrany w Chrystusa, z cieniem wojskowego Króla Chrystusa. Na zdjęciu są dwa plecionki Iroskotskie w postaci CHIRHO - XP. Kształt włazu jest obrazem raven - kruk mitologii Wikingów, obraz Trójcy jest w nim zapisany wtórnie. Hełm dziś jest cały zmodyfikowany przez doposażenie zderzaka w przeciwną stronę, z powodu uszkodzenia kaletki hełmu.

Przepraszam za automatyczne tłumaczenie.

Sommario:

L'elmo di San Venceslao è una vera e propria proprietà di combattimento, corazzata dal principe Venceslao, probabilmente ispirata all'immagine della santa Trinità. Il Cristo risorto che riposa tra le braccia del Padre, lo Spirito Santo come una colomba. Dio Padre viene mostrato con le mani che tengono Cristo sotto il suo braccio e non dorme mai l'occhio di Dio sul petto di Cristo. L'immagine è distintamente in stile bizantino, vestita con Cristo, con un cingolo del re militare Cristo. Ci sono due trecce Iroskot nella forma di CHIRHO - XP nella foto. La forma del portello è un'immagine del ravena - corvo della mitologia vichinga, l'immagine della Trinità è inscritta in esso secondario. L'elmetto oggi è tutto modificato modificando il paraurti sul lato opposto, a causa del danneggiamento della calotta del casco.

Mi scuso per la traduzione automatica.

Resumen:

El casco de San Wenceslao es una propiedad de combate real, blindada por el príncipe Wenceslao, probablemente inspirada en la imagen de la Santísima Trinidad. El Cristo resucitado descansando en los brazos del Padre, el Espíritu Santo como una paloma. Dios el Padre se muestra con las manos sosteniendo a Cristo bajo el brazo y nunca durmiendo el ojo de Dios sobre el pecho de Cristo. La imagen es claramente de estilo bizantino, vestida con Cristo, con un cíngulo de rey militar Cristo. Hay dos trenzas Iroskot en forma de CHIRHO - XP en la imagen. La forma de la escotilla es una imagen del ravena - cuervo de la mitología vikinga, la imagen de la Trinidad está inscrita en ella como secundaria. El casco de hoy es el conjunto modificado al retroceder el paragolpes al lado opuesto, debido a daños en el casquete del casco.

Me disculpo por la traducción automática.

Резюме:

Шлем Св. Вацлава является личным боевым снаряжением князя Вацлава и, по всей вероятности, имеющийся декор на шлеме инициирован им же: образ небесной родины – Царство Отца и Сына и Святого Духа.

На шлеме Бог-Отец изображён с возведёнными руками, держащими Христа над собой как символ жертвенного служения миру во имя его Спасения. Цель восходит от византийских жертвенных подвижников, представляющих Христа в облике Святого воина. Цингулум милитаре Христос-король. На боевом снаряжении можно увидеть два изображения, напоминаюших ирландское плетение в виде монограммы имени Христа – CHIRHO -XP.

Форма наносника напоминает изображение клюва чёрного ворона, который, согласно мифологии викингов, олицетворяет ум и память.

Иносказателен и образ Троицы, изображённый на воинском шлеме. Сама конструкция снаряжения также подверглась изменениям в связи с переносом наносника на противоположную сторону из-за повреждения калота шлема.

Zusammenfassung:

Der St.-Wenzels-Helm ist ein echtes Kampfobjekt, gepanzert von Fürst Wenzel, wahrscheinlich inspiriert vom Bild der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit. Der auferstandene Christus ruht in den Armen des Vaters, der Heilige Geist wie eine Taube. Gott der Vater wird mit Händen gezeigt, die Christus unter seinem Arm halten und niemals Gottes Auge auf Christi Brust schlafen. Das Bild ist deutlich im byzantinischen Stil, gekleidet mit Christus, mit einem Cingulum des militärischen König Christus. Es gibt zwei Iroskot Zöpfe in Form von CHIRHO - XP auf dem Bild. Die Form der Luke ist ein Bild des Raben - Raben der Wikinger - Mythologie, das Bild der Dreifaltigkeit ist darin sekundär eingeschrieben. Der Helm wird heute durch Umrüstung des Stoßfängers auf die gegenüberliegende Seite, wegen Beschädigung der Helmkalotte, insgesamt modifiziert.

Ich entschuldige mich für die automatische Übersetzung.

Zhrnutie:

Svatováclavská prilba je skutočným bojovým vlastníctvom, zbrojou kniežaťa Václava, pravdepodobne z jeho popudu je ozdobená obrazom najsvätejšej Trojice. Zmŕtvychvstalý Kristus odpočívajúci v lone Otca, Duch Svätý ako holubica. Boh Otec je znázornený rukami držiacimi Krista pod pažou a nikdy nespíacím Božím okom na Kristovej hrudi. Obraz je výrazne v byzantskom štýle, s oblečeným Kristom, s cingulum militare Krista kráľa. Na obraze sú dva iroskotské pletence v podobe CHIRHO - XP. Tvar nanosky je obrazom ravena - havrana vikingské mytológie, obraz Trojica je do neho vpísaný druhotne. Prilba dnes je celok upravený dodatočne premiestnením nanosky na opačnú stranu, z dôvodu poškodenia kaloty prilby.

Ospravedlňujem sa za automatický preklad.

Written materiál of monastic institutions stays to be a constant of the themes studied by historical Sciences. However, the issue of female monasteries stays to be among them a “Cinderella”. Many of them were ranged among the most im-... more

Written materiál of monastic institutions stays to be a constant of the themes studied by historical Sciences. However, the issue of female monasteries stays to be among them a “Cinderella”. Many of them were ranged among the most im- portant Bohemian monasteries, such as the presented monastery of Benedictine of St. George at the Prague Castle (see its position of the oldest monastery of Czech countries). There are certain specifications, given by many facts, for example the origin of nuns (abbesses and nuns often came from a ruling family or from high Bohemian aristocracy); by keeping family relations; large economic possibilities of the monastery and the placement near royal court. It works with documents as well as with manuscripts from i3th to early isth century (or until the beginning of Hus- site movement). The time period is given by the specific development of St. Ceorge Monastery at that era. Iťs necessary to mention that these documents were hrst made outside the monastery (from the rádius of Vyšehraďs canons), from the end of the 13* century, Services inside were ušed (maybe the canons of St. George monastery, connected with assumpted activities of scriptorium of St. Geor¬ge Monastery) and from the half of the i4th century, Services of public notaries were fmally ušed. The examined documents were connected with an uncommonly extensive production of manuscripts in this particular time. There are, apparently, connections to documents’ production in some cases (námely manuscripts NK ČR XIII.E.i4e, VI.C.16b, XIII. A.2), but direct writeťs agreements were not proved, of course. Both groups prove some elimination and penetration into the strictly de- fined historical frontiers - which is typical for observed materiál. There is a men¬tion of seals that belonged to the abbesses of St. Ceorge monastery in connection with an effort to prove the sovereign position of St. Ceorge Monastery. There is an interesting contradiction between manuscripts’ care (and a fully functioning bib- liotheca) and documents (lower care of its preservation). The St. Ceorge monastery canons’ situation was left apart because it requires a separate study. Definitely, results show the high niveau of written culture and tradition in the monastery and sovereign position of the abbesses and the whole convent as well as the effort to prove the existence of the scriptorium in this monastery.