The Arizona Republic

A year after Jennings’ death, a polished black granite gravestone bearing an epitaph identifies his resting place in Mesa.

By BETTY BEARD

betty.beard@arizonarepublic.com

MESA – After being unmarked for a year, the grave of country singer Waylon Jennings at the Mesa Cemetery finally has a granite marker and an epitaph honoring the “vagabond dreamer.”

The flat, polished black granite marker was installed Saturday, three days after the first anniversary of his death Feb. 12, 2002.

Jennings – known for such hits as “A Good Hearted Woman” and “Luckenbach, Texas” – died last year at age 64 at his Chandler home.

The marker’s right side reads, “A vagabond dreamer, a rhymer and a singer of songs, a revolutionary in country music, beloved by the world.”

And on the left: “I am my beloved’s. My beloved is mine. A loving son, husband, father and grandfather.”

The marker also has his picture, and yesterday was surrounded by red carnations, an American flag and four bouquets of silk flowers. There also were several mementos, including a laminated photo of what appears to be a wall that has a cupid’s heart with the word “Jessi” in it.

He is buried near his in-laws: the parents and brother of his widow, Jessi Colter.

Rob McCauley, cemetery operations coordinator, said it took a year to get the marker because Colter first had to decide what she wanted it to say and it took a while to get the special stone.

The grave site already has attracted a trickle of tourists. McCauley said several people a week have been asking where it is, although it has been difficult for people to locate.

Wayne Schmitt, 70, a winter visitor from Rock Falls, Ill., was one who finally found the grave, thanks to the marker. He had looked before but was told by someone in the cemetery office only that it was “out there by the flowers.” But there are flowers everywhere.

PHOTO CAPTION: RUSSELL GATES/The Arizona Republic

Fans, friends and family looking to honor Waylon Jennings can more easily find his grave site now.