Just past the 22nd anniversary of Country Music Hall of Famer Waylon Jennings' death, the memory of the songwriter continues to be fondly cherished by fans and honored in country culture.

Jennings died at the age of 64 on Feb. 13, 2002, at his home in Chandler. He got his start during the late '50s and recorded more than 60 albums throughout his career, writing 16 No. 1 country singles including "I've Always Been Crazy," "I'm a Ramblin' Man," and "Ladies Love Outlaws."

Originally from Littlefield, Texas, Jennings moved to Arizona in 1961, where he worked in radio and played in Phoenix-area clubs, according to the Willie Nelson and Friends Museum. He is widely known for pioneering and popularizing the outlaw movement, a subgenre that blends country instrumentation with rock rhythms.

Following his death, the country music legend was buried in a Mesa cemetery.

Why is Waylon Jennings buried in Arizona?

After living in Arizona for a few years, Jennings moved to Nashville in 1965, and from then on he constantly traveled across Southwestern cities. Yet, he always maintained a residence in Arizona.

Soon after the new millennium came around, Jennings' declining health worsened when he was diagnosed with diabetes. His illness brought cardiovascular and respiratory complications, and his left foot had to be amputated in December 2001.

On Feb. 13, 2002, Waylon died in his sleep at his home in Arizona, and he was buried in Mesa.

Why did Waylon Jennings move to Arizona?

Following the Clear Lake fatal plane crash that caused the death of his close friend, Buddy Holly, in 1959, Jennings was left stunned and needed some time to recover, which ultimately prompted him to move states, according to the Willie Nelson Museum.

After working in radio and playing in small clubs around town, Jennings got a job at a Scottsdale club called J.D.’s. There, Waylon formed a band called the Waylors, and their music was an instant success, according to the Arizona Music and Entertainment Hall of Fame.

The Waylors developed a unique sound that incorporated country, rock, and folk, quickly establishing Jennings as a regional star with a rapidly growing following of fans.

Waylon's career continued to grow after he moved to Nashville. Jennings would return to Arizona sporadically throughout his lifetime.

In the late 1970s, when Jennings was nearing the summit of his career, he returned to Arizona to retreat and detox from substances, as he had developed an addiction to amphetamines and cocaine. Jennings was successful in quitting drugs in 1984, according to the museum.

When Jennings died from health complications in 2002, he was at his home in Chandler.