‘A splendidly paced and structured narrative.’ Literary Review

Hong Kong, Spring 1997.

The handover of the prized British colony to its new masters is fast approaching.

The body of a senior Chinese official is found floating in the harbour, its hands handcuffed behind his back. Inspector Bao Zheng, a middle-ranking officer in the Beijing Criminal Investigation Department, is part of the team sent to investigate.

Or is that why they have been sent? Has the team been tasked to hide the truth?

Bao’s investigations soon lead to connections with the colony’s powerful criminal gangs and the trade in counterfeit goods.

There is also rivalry and dissent within the small mainland legation in the colony: was the dead man killed by an ambitious colleague or silenced by a furious superior? And exactly what role does an obscure, boat-dwelling call-girl play in the matter?

The truth, when it emerges, is deeply shocking and presents Bao with a painful moral dilemma.

Chris West is a British writer. He works in a range of genres: business, psychology, history and crime / general fiction. His China Quartet, four mysteries written in the 1990s, were among the first crime novels to be set in the contemporary People's Republic of China.

Praise for the Inspector Bao Zheng series:

‘Does for China what Gorky Park did for Russia.’ Fort Lauderdale Sun Sentinel

‘Few authors since Robert van Gulik have been able to create such a wonderful picture of Chinese society.’ Mystery Review

‘A perfect melding of character, plot and atmosphere. My number one read for the year.’ Mid-West Review

‘A dazzling tour of contemporary Beijing life.’ Publishers Weekly

‘A bang-up-to-date commentary on the dilemmas of modern China, where young and old are grappling with the change from ancient traditions and Marxism to consumer-crazy Westernization.’ Tangled Web

‘Teasing and cunning, with lots of misleading clues.’ Gerald Kaufman, The Scotsman

‘If you can’t get to Hong Kong, buy this book instead!’ Alex Auswaks, Jerusalem Post