Zeezok Publishing's Z-Guide to The Red Badge of Courage is a great way to incorporate media into your study of the Civil War.

This guide contains a topic overview movie synopsis and ten learning activities for an in-depth study of the film and the Civil War. Learn more about the war and battlefield maneuvers. Offer Henry advice on how to overcome his fears. Develop your writing skills with an encyclopedia article on your favorite Civil War character. Illustrate the 304ths famous charge or take The Red Badge of Courage word search challenge. Evaluate your personal beliefs with the Worldview Activity. Probe the directors mind with The Filmmakers Art activity and get the entire family involved with the For Family Discussion section at the end of the guide. Choose those activities which best fit your students course objectives areas of interest or time schedule.

Movie Summary: Henry Fleming faces a major dilemma on the eve of battle. Because of the close combat nature of the Civil War Henry fears he will flee the field in disgrace. When he does skedaddle he envies the wounded for their red badge of courage. Would such a symbol atone for his failure? When a fellow Union soldier knocks him senseless Henry fabricates a story that fools everyone in his regiment and his actions on the second day of battle win high praise from the regiments colonel. Henry leaves the field with confidence having conquered the inner demons that made him afraid of encountering the great death face to face.

Topics: Civil War Conquering Your Fears Psychology of War Consequences of Lying Contains a printable pdf file of the complete study guide. It does not include the movie.

This file is licensed to the original purchaser and is not to be resold. Permission is not granted for classroom district-wide school-wide system-wide or co-op use. Please contact Zeezok Publishing for a site license. (Movie sold separately.)

This Z-Guide is based on the movie The Red Badge of Courage (1951). You can view a trailer for the movie below.