Full Name: Ronald Earnest "Ron" Paul

Age: 76

Birthplace: Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

Party: Libertarian/Republican

Previous Political Experience: Member of U.S. House of Representatives (1976-1977, 1979-1985, 1997-present)

Current Job: Representative of Texas's 14th District, U.S. House

Major Platforms: Rights belong to individuals, rather than groups; Voluntary associations should be allowed, whether social or economic; People's actions are their own responsibility, not the government's; Property is supposed to be owned by people rather than government; Government was created to protect liberties rather that offer special privileges

Dr. Ron Paul is a physician and member of the U.S. House of Representatives, and he has also ran for President of the United States twice. As a member of the U.S. House, Paul has served on numerous committees, including the house Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Joint Economic Committee and the House Committee on Financial Services. Currently, Paul is chairman of the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy and Technology. During his time in the U.S. House, Paul has also been very outspoken in his views on current U.S. economic and foreign policy. Paul hails from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he was born to Howard Caspar and Margaret Paul. Paul's mother was of German and Irish ancestry, with his paternal great-grandparents emigrating to the United States from Germany. Paul has written a number of books on economic and political matters, including, "The Case for Gold," "Challenge to Liberty" and "A Manifesto, End the Fed." Paul currently resides in Lake Jackson, Texas with his wife, Carolyn "Carol" Paul. The couple has five grown children: Ronald Paul Jr., Lori Paul Pyeatt, Randal Paul, Robert Paul and Joy Paul-LeBlanc. Randal "Rand" Paul currently serves as the Junior Senator for the State of Kentucky and is an active member of the Tea Party Movement.

Ron Paul Family History

There are a number of interesting facts to note about Ron Paul, including:

Ron Paul's grandfather immigrated to the US from Germany with his family at the age of 14. Six months later, his father, Paul's great-grandfather, passed away.

While a junior at Dormont High School in Pittsburgh, Paul was the state champion in the 220-yard dash.

Dr. Paul is a specialist in obstetrics and gynecology and has delivered more than 4,000 babies throughout his medical career.

Dr. Paul served as a flight surgeon for the U.S. Air Force during the 1960s.

During his medical career, Dr. Paul lowered fees or offered services for free to avoid accepting Medicare or Medicaid payments.

Dr. Paul has been unwavering in his political and economic principles, earning respect from fellow congressmen - even those who do not agree with his stand on issues.

Dr. Ronald Earnest Paul was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania on August 20, 1935. His parents, Howard Caspar and Margaret, owned a dairy farm, which Paul worked on during his free time in childhood. Paul was the third of five sons. In addition to work on the family's dairy farm, Paul also earned money during his younger years as a paperboy and then at a local drug store. Paul was athletic during his school years, as a member of both the track and wrestling teams. It was here that Paul showed his athletic ability, taking the state championship in the 220-yard dash during his junior year of high school. Paul also served as the president of his high school student council. It was in high school that Paul met his wife Carolyn Paul. The two married during Paul's last year of college.

After high school, Paul attended Gettysburgh College, where he studied biology and was a member of the Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity. Paul then earned his doctor of medicine degree from the Duke University School of Medicine and completed his residency in Michigan at the Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit. After serving as a surgeon in the Air Force, Paul went on to serve in the United States National Guard from 1965 to 1968. Once his public service was complete, Dr. Paul and his wife moved to Texas, where Paul established his own medical practice in Brazoria County.

During the 1970s, Paul became involved in the political arena, after being inspired by Friedrich Hayek's "The Road to Serdom" a decade previously. Paul also read publications by Ludwig Von Mises and Ayn Rand, as well as studied economists Hans Sennholz and Murray Rothbard. Paul served his first term in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1976 to 1977, winning a special election when the office was vacated mid-term by Robert R. Casey. In the next general election, Paul lost his seat, but won it back two short years later.

In 1984, Paul voluntarily relinquished his House seat to return to his medical practice in Texas. However, he returned to the political field in 1997, representing the 14th Congressional District of Texas in the U.S. House. Currently, Paul continues to hold that seat, even while running his second campaign for presidency. His first run, for the Libertarian Party, occurred in 1988, which he lost to George H.W. Bush. At the time, Paul said his White House run was more about promoting his ideas than in seriously seeking the presidential office. This year, Paul is running for the Republican primary, in hopes of getting on the ticket against Democratic incumbent Barack Obama in 2012.