Look to the stands or player’s box at any given match of Caroline Wozniacki’s, and you’re likely to see David Lee. The husband of the Danish tennis star – and Vogue Scandinavia digital cover star – is as supportive as they come, and the duo’s shared background of professional sports makes for a clear appreciation of what each has accomplished. Below, we answer all your questions about Lee, from his career to the couple’s love story in the sporting spotlight.

Where is David Lee from?

Unlike his Danish wife, David Lee hails from St. Louis, Missouri in the United States. He grew up there, fostering his basketball talent while attending school. Growing up in Missouri, Lee became ambidextrous after breaking his left arm (his naturally dominant side), inadvertently adding some serious skill to his game. He departed his hometown to attend college at the University of Florida, and, post-graduation, moved according to the teams he played for.

Related: Sweet Caroline Wozniacki

What is David Lee’s career?

While he retired from his career back in 2017, Lee enjoyed a productive 12 seasons in the NBA. He was first drafted to the New York Knicks in 2005, where he rose through the ranks and developed his game, leading to a trip to the All-Star Game (an annual event for the best players in the league). He switched teams in 2010, heading to the Golden State Warriors in the Bay Area. While with the Warriors, Lee’s experience and knowledge of the game aided the young team alongside his on-court contributions. The team won the championship in 2015, the pinnacle to a season that marked the start of the Warriors dynasty. After those fruitful years in the developing Warriors team, Lee had brief stints with the Boston Celtics, Dallas Mavericks, and San Antonio Spurs before retiring. Today, alongside caring for his children, Lee is known to engage in investment ventures.

What is the story of David Lee and Caroline Wozniacki’s romance?

Lee met Wozniacki serendipitously at a dinner party thrown by a mutual friend in Miami, Florida. They found a great connection, and talked late into the night at Wozniacki's hotel before Lee went to sleep in the guest room. While his hopes for having breakfast together the next morning were shattered by the realities of her demanding career (she had practice), they stayed in touch, and officially began dating in 2016. After proposing to Wozniacki on a private dinner cruise in Bora Bora, the two wed in 2019. Their Tuscan wedding was a stunning affair, with guests like Serena Williams and Harrison Barnes in attendance. The couple welcomed two children to their family in 2021 and 2022, a girl named Olivia and a boy, James.

Related: Inside Caroline Wozniacki’s wedding at Castiglion del Bosco in Tuscany

How does David Lee support Caroline Wozniacki?

Just as Caroline Wozniacki was often seen cheering on the sidelines of Lee’s games prior to his retirement, Lee is a fixture at Wozniacki’s matches. A devoted husband and father, he supported Wozniacki as she announced her retirement in 2020, and was just as unwavering in his confidence in her when she declared her return to tennis in 2023. Speaking about the changes of that period, Wozniacki reflected, “It would have been easy for him to say, ‘We’re living a great life, we’re chilling, let’s just sit back and enjoy.’ But instead, he was like ‘Go for it, I’m here to support you and we’ll figure it out as a family. We’ll do it together and we’ll have fun doing it.’”