David Lee, Ph.D., has been a faculty member in the Department of Public Health Sciences at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine since 1990. He serves as Department Chair. Dr. Lee is a chronic disease and occupational epidemiologist and has been continuously funded as Principal/Co-Principal Investigator on various grants from the National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention since 1993. He also serves as Principal Investigator for the Florida Cancer Data System, which is the second largest state cancer registry in the United States. Dr. Lee is lead or co-author on over 275 peer-reviewed research articles. Additionally, students are active members of his research teams contributing to 50+ student-led publications in leading public health and biomedical journals. A strong emphasis on health disparity reduction is a crosscutting theme within his research portfolio. Dr. Lee’s current research interests include: public health applications of mind-body practices for the prevention and management of stress and living with chronic disease, enhancing the health of the US workforce, cancer surveillance and prevention, and sensory impairment surveillance.

Dr. Lee has taught graduate courses in the Department of Public Health Science since 1992 and currently is course director for Health Policy. He also developed and launched a first-of-its kind course in Mindfulness in Public Health and Medicine that combined didactic and experiential training on the use of mind-body techniques to manage the stressors associated with modern life. Dr. Lee has mentored many doctoral students, fellows and junior faculty as well as high school students over his 30+ years at the University of Miami. Students and junior faculty have served as lead authors for approximately one-quarter of the 275+ publications by Dr. Lee. He has served as a K-grant mentor and sponsor for a number of F30/F31-supported students as well as serving on 30+ PhD dissertation committees, 14 as committee Chair. Dr. Lee’s training and mentorship philosophy is grounded in the promotion of inclusive, safe and supportive research environments that values each trainee’s skills, interests, and values.