James Harold Wilson, Baron Wilson of Rievaulx, was a British Labour politician who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1964 to 1970 and again from 1974 to 1976.

Portrayal[]

Wilson was portrayed as being constantly grumpy, somewhat arrogant and disappointed with the way Labour is being run, expressing his dislike for his successors James Callaghan, Michael Foot and Neil Kinnock for their failures to win general elections. He frequently tries to escape Exchequers.

History[]

Series 1[]

Episode 1[]

He arrives at Exchequers, believing it to be his own official residence in retirement, only to discover, to his horror, former Conservative Prime Ministers Alec Douglas-Home and Harold Macmillan living there. Mortified at the thought of spending his twilight years with Tories, his fears get worse when he's greeted by his successor James Callaghan. He decides to escape, after hearing an offscreen Edward Heath play on his organ, to which he fails upon learning from a taunting Callaghan of the retirement home's extreme security measures. He tries calling for his Private Secretary Marcia Williams but the home's matron Queen Victoria, comes downstairs annoyed by the noise and pulls him by the ear to the table, where she force feeds him with Macmillan's ear trumpet (she tricks him into opening his mouth by saying how well Neil Kinnock's doing at being the new Labour leader).

Wilson whines about how unfair this whole situation is on him, claiming he deserves better as he's a Lord and he met the Beatles, and begins crying. When former Labour leader Michael Foot enters, asking for odd jobs, Wilson yells at him to get out and soon throws him out the window for his landslide defeat at the previous election. An angered Victoria re-enters holding the battered Foot, and figuring out that Wilson caused the window to break, slaps him repeatedly and forces him to eat his soup. Douglas-Home, playing around with his fishing rod, lands his bait in the soup. Wilson mistakes it for a fly and pulls it out, only for Douglas-Home to tumble down the stairs in his wheelchair. Wilson can only feel annoyed at his soup being ruined as Macmillan tells him not to worry.

Episode 2[]

He is seen sleeping next to Macmillan as the latter tells the viewer about Prince Andrew.

Appearances[]

Series 1

Episode 001 Debut Episode 002 Appears Episode 003 Absent Episode 004 Appears Episode 005 Absent Episode 006 Absent Episode 007 Absent Episode 008 Absent Episode 009 Absent Episode 010 Absent Episode 011 Absent Episode 012 Absent

Trivia[]

Navigation[]