How to Create Online Courses

Everything You Need to Know to Get Started

Use these easy graphic design tricks to take dated or awkward courses and make them feel modern.

This week’s challenge is to share a short demo or interaction that helps e-learning designers collaborate more effect...

Featured Downloads

Check out these pro tips from Julie Dirksen for practical ways you can encourage your learners to pay attention.

E‑Learning Jobs

Find your next gig and post open opportunities for free on our job board

Published on June 25, 2024 Hello E-Learning Heroes community members! It’s Jesse Taber, Director of Eng...

In this video, you'll learn how to use activity reports to answer questions like: What are the completion rates for a...

These four approaches make it easy to blend different kinds of images together in a polished way.

Here are some helpful tips to reach learners who are dealing with slow (or no) internet.

This week’s challenge asked course designers to share a detailed and functional model of their game show interaction....

From Quick Tips: Episode 99. Some community members asked for templates of this popular demo course. In this tutoria...

Learn how to create a tabs interaction in Storyline 360, build onboarding training in Rise 360, and more.

In this movie, you'll learn how to import and publish third-party training content into Reach 360.

Get the inside scoop on what it’s like to work with different translation vendors.

Discover 13 ways course designers create interactive prototypes for e-learning games.

From Quick Tips: Episode 105 Recently I've seen a few questions in the community about using media in Rise 360, so I...

If you’re involved with e-learning training, it’s important that you have a solid grasp of what ADDIE instructional d...

When something’s new, it can feel complex and difficult. And when you’re first getting into e-learning and you view a...

Discover 14 examples that show what e-learning course designers do.

Find out what to expect when testing your e-learning with this assistive technology.

Jarrod Hogan of Intermountain Health reveals how changing the way he shared training helped him reach learners faster...

See why our customers love using our frictionless LMS for training distribution.

Discover 20+ ways course designers use drag-and-drop interactions in e-learning.

From Quick Tips: Episode 97. This quick tip comes from a community member who asked how to create a drag and drop in...

When it comes to creating engaging, relevant e-learning, video is a great way to capture content and your learners’ a...

This week’s challenge asked course designers to show how 360° images can transform static visuals into interactive, e...

Ensure your course quality is top-notch no matter what language your learner speaks.

Discover new creative ways to use this handy e-learning feature.

Discover 13 ways course designers rework e-learning projects to meet accessibility guidelines.

From Quick Tips: Episode 95. This quick tip comes from a community member who was using the interactive markers with...

Learn how the basics of Bloom’s Taxonomy will help you write clear learning objectives and design effective e-learnin...