Article content

Last year, Pierre Karl Péladeau went through an astonishing transformation. The well-known media mogul - and former owner of the Sun Media newspaper chain - ran for provincial politics under, of all things, the Parti Québécois’ separatist banner.

He was a star candidate. He won a close contest in the Quebec riding of Saint-Jérôme. He watched his party, including then premier Pauline Marois, suffer its worst electoral defeat in decades. He entered the PQ leadership race last November, a few months after Marois stepped down.

Two weeks ago, after slightly more than a year in politics, the relatively green Péladeau won a first ballot victory with 57.58% of delegate support to become the PQ’s new leader.

It wasn’t a big surprise, however.

Few PQ members expressed interest in becoming leader after the party was decimated last April. The ever ambitious Péladeau took hold of this golden opportunity to become the party’s chevalier blanc (white knight). He had most of the caucus support, as well as high-profile figures like former Premier Bernard Landry.

Meanwhile, Péladeau’s main rival, PQ MNA and former Radio-Canada journalist Bernard Drainville, dropped out of the race on April 22 and supported him. The final result against the remaining candidates, Alexandre Cloutier and Martine Ouellet, was never in any doubt.

The PQ has high hopes for Péladeau’s leadership. They believe he has the intelligence, determination and work ethic to bring this separatist party back from the brink of disaster.

My view? While it would be incredibly foolish to underestimate his abilities, I firmly believe that English Canadians, and the Rest of Canada, can breathe a whole lot easier. The man known by the acronym “PKP” isn’t the political saviour the PQ is looking for.

Here’s why.

First, Péladeau is obsessed with the issue of separatism. Once regarded as the PQ’s raison d'être, it’s now an issue that just doesn’t sell in Quebec. A June 2014 poll by Léger Marketing noted that 61% of respondents supported this statement: “Quebec will never separate from Canada.” While most separatists want Quebec to have more independence within the Confederation, they don’t seem interested in seeking independence from Canada.

Hold on. A poll conducted by Léger this month for two Quebec newspapers, Le Devoir and Le Journal de Montréal, showed Péladeau slightly leading in the polls - and a 10% increase in overall support for separatism (32% to 42%). Doesn’t this show that Quebecers are beginning to think about sovereignty again?

Not necessarily.

Péladeau is a new political leader, and has a new (if rather vague) vision for an old political canard. He’s therefore experiencing a temporary surge in popular support, which is a common occurrence in politics. Yet, there’s an important distinction between acquiring a bump in the polls - and sustaining that bump. Separatism has been on the decline for years, and it will take more than a few political platitudes to permanently change its personal and public appeal.

Second, Péladeau’s status as a capitalist and separatist is incredibly confusing. The party he leads is left-wing, social democratic and pro-union -- everything he’s not. Capitalism isn’t seen as one of the pillars on which the PQ can legitimately fight a campaign.

Hence, the new leader’s political blend of capitalist separatism (or separatist capitalism) could frustrate many socialist-leaning PQ supporters. If he loses their votes, are there right-leaning ones he could replace them with? Considering Quebec’s political history, that’s highly unlikely.

Third, Quebec Premier Philippe Couillard and the Liberals introduced a surprisingly fiscally conservative budget in an attempt to fix the struggling provincial economy. This takes away a significant chunk of Péladeau’s free market tendencies, and forces him to backpeddle until he can find or identify economic policies he can use to his political advantage.

Fourth, Péladeau appears to enjoy ruffling people’s feathers, including those of his own party members. This isn’t a personality trait that will naturally endear him to Quebecers. They prefer their premiers to appear populist and personable, rather than elitist and aloof. If this perception continues, it could ultimately turn off PQ supporters, voters and, most importantly, longtime financial backers.

There won’t be a new Quebec election until 2018. Péladeau has time to work out the kinks in his political armour, and create a more polished platform and persona. Yet, I don’t believe he’s ready, or willing, to change. His leadership, therefore, won’t get the PQ any closer to the brass ring - and could cause the party to fall further behind.

Advantage, Rest of Canada.