Padma Lakshmi has talked candidly about her marriage to Salman Rushdie under threat of fatwā and also gave an update on her ex just 10 months after being stabbed.

The 52-year-old media personality - who recently announced her shock departure from Top Chef - appeared on Who's Talking With Chris Wallace to talk about her marriage with the now 75-year-old author.

Lakshmi and Rushdie were married from 2004 to 2007 as he had a fatwā for his execution.

A fatwā is a legal ruling on a point of Islamic law given by a qualified Faqih in response to a question posed by a private individual, judge or government.

The author's 1988 novel the Satanic Verses, which reimagines parts of the Prophet Muhammad's life, led to Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini to issue a fatwa — a death sentence — against Rushdie.

She talked about being with author at that time as she explained: 'I would be lying if I said, I didn't think about those things. I did think about the fatwā every day of my life, I couldn't not think about it.

'But what I thought about more, was very deep love between us. And that made me not afraid, because I was with the man I loved. And I thought that was where it should be.'

Lakshmi also got candid as she revealed that her family was not too pleased when she began her relationship with Rushdie.

She said: 'My family wasn't very excited at first either, you know, by this relationship, but they also in time really grew to love Salman and that's really what I hope propels all of my important decisions.'

Back in August 2022, Rushdie was brutally stabbed as he was about to give a lecture at a literary festival in New York.

He was airlifted to the hospital and was in the hospital for six weeks before being discharged. Rushdie lost vision in one eye and use of a hand.

His attacker, Hadi Matar, 24, was ultimately charged with attempted second-degree murder and second-degree assault. he has since plead not guilty.

Lakshmi gave a positive update on her ex as she said: 'He's healing beautifully, valiantly. Like everyone else, when I heard about it it catapulted me right back to things that I hadn't thought about for a very long time.

'You know, obviously, we have a lot of common friends and I think he's doing great. He's a tough old boot. And he's not anything if he's not tenacious, so I'm happy that he is healing.'

This comes just days after she quit Top Chef after 19 seasons as host.

The star, 52, announced her departure on Instagram on Friday, June 2 where she revealed her decision stemmed from a desire to move onto 'other creative pursuits' after 17 years on the Bravo show.

She wrote: 'After much soul searching, I have made the difficult decision to leave Top Chef. Having completed a glorious 20th season as host and executive producer, I am extremely proud to have been part of building such a successful show and of the impact it has had in the worlds of television and food.'

'After 17 years, many of the cast and crew are like family to me and I will miss working alongside them dearly, I feel it's time to move on and need to make space for Taste the Nation, my books and other creative pursuits.

'I am deeply thankful to all of you for so many years of love and support. Sincerely, Padma.'

Top Chef began in 2006 and was hosted by Katie Lee Joel. Lakshmi began hosting the show in season 2.

She joined judges Tom Colicchio and Gail Simmons on the show.

The show features chefs competing against each other in culinary challenges. The contestants are judged by a panel of professional chefs and other notables from the food and wine industry, with one or more contestants eliminated in each episode.

She has scored four Emmy nominations for outstanding reality show host and 10 Emmy nominations for outstanding competition program as a producer on the show.

The success of the show has resulted in multiple spin-offs, such as Top Chef Masters, Top Chef: Just Desserts, Top Chef Junior and Top Chef Amateurs.

Padma shares 13-year-old daughter Krishna Thea, with venture capitalist Adam Dell, brother of computer magnate Michael Dell.

She was married to novelist Salman Rushdie from 2004 - 2007.

The Emmy-nominated food expert, television producer, host, and New York Times bestselling author is thriving on her Hulu show Taste The Nation which is going into its second season.

The single parent has said: 'I think on Top Chef, for so long, my position and my role on that show caused people to think I was more intimidating than I am — I had to be stoic in my role — but that's not me normally.'

'You know, it was a new skill for me to interview people,' she admitted.

'I mean, I'm a food writer.

'Before Taste the Nation, I could count on one hand the times I had to interview people, and those were at a literary festival or a food festival — it wasn't for anything very high stakes. It was something I had to learn on set, and I'm still learning.'

And she has her journalism skills down.

'I think the reason I learned [how to become an interviewer] so quickly is that I'm genuinely interested,' Lakshmi confided.

'The whole show is created around all of my various interests: history, food, people, languages, traveling. I'm genuinely curious.'