Loading...

The Road to Mars

by Eric Idle

Other authors: See the other authors section.

MembersReviewsPopularityAverage ratingMentions8182127,554 (3.19)16

What makes humans bark? Is the funny bone funny? What is the algebra of comedy? Did the sitcom originate with the ape? Carlton is an android (a 4.5 Bowie Artificial Intelligence Robot) who works for Alex and Lewis, two comedians from the twenty-second century who travel the outer vaudeville circuit of the solar system known ironically as the Road to Mars. His problem is that although as a computer he cannot understand irony, he is attempting to write a thesis about comedy, its place in evolution, and whether it can ever be cured. And he is also studying the comedians of the late twentieth century (including obscure and esoteric comedy acts such as Monty Python's Flying Circus) in his search for the comedy gene. In the meantime, while auditioning for a gig on the Princess Di (a solar cruise ship), his two employers inadvertently offend the fabulous diva Brenda Woolley and become involved in a terrorist plot against Mars, the home of Showbiz. Can Carlton prevent Alex and Lewis from losing their gigs, help them overcome the love thing, and finally understand the meaning of comedy in the universe? Will a robot ever really be able to do stand-up? As Einstein might have said, nothing in the universe can travel faster than the speed of laughter. The Road to Mars was named one of the best books of 1999 by the Los Angeles Times.… (more)

▾Tags

▾LibraryThing Recommendations

▾Lists

None

▾Will you like it?

Loading...

Sign up for LibraryThing to find out whether you'll like this book.

▾Conversations (About links)

No current Talk conversations about this book.

» See also 16 mentions

▾Other authors

» Add other authors (1 possible)

Author nameRoleType of authorWork?StatusEric Idle—primary authorall editionscalculatedWillmann, TamaraTranslatorsecondary authorsome editionsconfirmed

▾Series and work relationships

▾Awards and Honors

▾Common Knowledge

You must log in to edit Common Knowledge data.

For more help see the Common Knowledge help page.

Original title Alternative titles Original publication date People/Characters Important places Important events Related movies Epigraph Dedication

For Tania

First words

Fame is a terminal disease.

Last words Disambiguation notice Publisher's editors Blurbers Canonical DDC/MDS Canonical LCC

▾References

References to this work on external resources.

Wikipedia in English

None

▾Book descriptions

What makes humans bark? Is the funny bone funny? What is the algebra of comedy? Did the sitcom originate with the ape? Carlton is an android (a 4.5 Bowie Artificial Intelligence Robot) who works for Alex and Lewis, two comedians from the twenty-second century who travel the outer vaudeville circuit of the solar system known ironically as the Road to Mars. His problem is that although as a computer he cannot understand irony, he is attempting to write a thesis about comedy, its place in evolution, and whether it can ever be cured. And he is also studying the comedians of the late twentieth century (including obscure and esoteric comedy acts such as Monty Python's Flying Circus) in his search for the comedy gene. In the meantime, while auditioning for a gig on the Princess Di (a solar cruise ship), his two employers inadvertently offend the fabulous diva Brenda Woolley and become involved in a terrorist plot against Mars, the home of Showbiz. Can Carlton prevent Alex and Lewis from losing their gigs, help them overcome the love thing, and finally understand the meaning of comedy in the universe? Will a robot ever really be able to do stand-up? As Einstein might have said, nothing in the universe can travel faster than the speed of laughter. The Road to Mars was named one of the best books of 1999 by the Los Angeles Times.

▾Library descriptions

No library descriptions found.

▾LibraryThing members' description

Book description

Haiku summary

Current Discussions

None

Popular covers

Quick Links

Rating

Average: (3.19)

0.51 81.5 22 162.5 53 493.5 54 264.5 15 16

Is this you?

Become a LibraryThing Author.