Almost 40 years after the first Mad Max become an unexpected hit around the world, Steve Bisley is still recognised regularly for playing motorcycle cop Jim Goose.

"Every day," he says. "It's crazy."

Despite a long career in film, television and theatre - including regular roles in Police Rescue, GP, Frontline, Water Rats, Sea Patrol and Doctor Doctor - George Miller's high-octane film with fellow NIDA student Mel Gibson has kept following him around.

So while continuing to establish himself as a writer with two published memoirs and a fictional debut out next year, Bisley launched a Jim The Goose website earlier this year to answer fan questions and sell shirts, caps and autographed posters.

Now he is heading into the online world again as he prepares to direct his first film, Pauline, based on Stillways, his critically acclaimed 2013 memoir about growing up in rural NSW.

"A lot of people said to me 'you should make this into a film'," Bisley says. "So I started to write and it was probably about the fourth draft in, it became obvious to me that it was as much my mother's story as it was mine."

What he calls a period coming-of-age family drama centres on "a trained teacher, a poet and a romantic who left the city and everything she knew to throw her lot in with a damaged man, who had recently returned from the war, to start a new life on a small parcel of land."

Raising three children, she deals with a series of trials with what Bisley describes as dignity and resolve.

The film will cover five years chronicled in Stillways, named after the family property at Lake Munmorah on the Central Coast, from the late 1950s to the early 1960s.

"The only name I've kept is Pauline and it's become her story," he says.

Bisley, 66, wants to shoot what he expects to be a $3 million film next year.

But before heading to funding agencies, he has launched a crowdfunding campaign to raise $25,000 to cover script editing, an acting workshop, location surveys and shooting test scenes.

His Indiegogo page offers lunch with the cast and crew for $2500 and "a role with words" for $5000.

"The script has gone through about seven drafts now but I've been writing it solo so I'd like some advice on it," he says.

While he has only directed small projects, Bisley feels qualified by standing "in front of so many cameras" over the years.

"I really want to do this because I know it so intimately," he says. "Plus I've had a lot of good rapport with some great cinematographers over the years."

Bisley has actors in mind to play his mother and himself but won't name them yet.