Mad Max: Fury Road and its surprisingly feminist mystique revs its way into theaters this weekend, awakening a whole new generation of road-warrior fans. But the legacy of Mad Max stretches all the way back to the original 1979 film, which kicked off an improbable franchise with an even bigger mark on pop culture than you might think. It’s not just a post-apocalyptic template or a skid mark-streaked road map for how to make a great car chase movie; famed filmmakers from David Fincher to Guillermo del Toro to James Cameron all cite the enormous influence of Max Rockatansky and his creator-director George Miller. It’s tempting to think of the Mad Max franchise—which had to wait an incredible 30 years between its third and fourth installments—as the little franchise that could, but it’s more accurate to call it the franchise that very nearly wasn’t. Here are eight reasons why the original 1979 Mad Max is one of the most improbable hits of all time.

An Accidental Leading Man: According to Mel Gibson, he didn’t intend to audition for Mad Max at all. An acting student at the National Institute of Dramatic Arts, Gibson went to drop his roommate Steve Bisley off at auditions. As the story goes, Gibson had been beaten to a pulp in a bar fight the night before and the casting agents asked him to come back because, they said, “We’re looking for freaks” to play the post-apocalyptic bikers. But when Gibson returned healed, his leading man looks and charisma landed him the lead. His buddy Bisley? He got the role of Max’s doomed partner Goose. It’s hard to imagine the Mad Max franchise without Mel Gibson, and vice versa.

A Director Who Wasn’t a Director: Before he made Mad Max, George Miller was an emergency room doctor. In fact, it was the gruesome injuries he saw in the hospital that inspired him to make the film. Miller had dabbled in student filmmaking and joined forces with fellow amateur filmmaker Byron Kennedy to make Mad Max. Miller and Kennedy raised funds for the film themselves in a number of ways including going out on emergency medical calls with Kennedy driving and Miller treating the wounded. They eventually pulled together enough—though not very much—to make their film.

A Budget of Beer: George Miller has claimed the original 1979 film cost somewhere between $350,000 and $400,000. That’s pretty unbelievable when you take into consideration all the crashes, explosions, and stunts that help give the Mad Max franchise its distinguishing flair. The budget was so low, in fact, that Miller has said some of the crew was paid in “slabs” of beer (that’s the Australian term for a case of 24). The upshot of the tiny budget is that, for nearly 20 years, Mad Max—which grossed nearly $100 million worldwide—held the Guinness World Record for most profitable film (until it was unseated by The Blair Witch Project).

Politics

George Clooney Says Joe Biden Can’t Beat Trump, Must Drop Out Now

According to the actor, the president is simply too old—and dropping out now would make him a hero of democracy.

Movies

Donald Trump Attacks “Fake Movie Actor” George Clooney After NYT Op-Ed

After Clooney publicly called for Joe Biden to drop out of the race, Trump took to Truth Social to criticize Clooney's career, claiming that “movies never really worked for him!”

Hollywood

Sienna Miller Is More Than Ready to Be Recognized for Her Work, Not Her Personal Life

The star of Kevin Costner’s four-part epic, Horizon, on tackling her next chapter, onscreen and off: “I’m done with grief and torture.”

Politics

Obama Knew George Clooney Was Going to Shiv Joe Biden, Didn’t Try to Stop It: Report

The former president was reportedly given a heads-up on the actor’s explosive op-ed.

Royals

Prince George and Prince William Wore Matching Ties—And Matching Looks of Terror—During the Nail Biter Euro Cup Final

The oldest child of William and his wife, Kate Middleton, traveled to Berlin to watch the match where England fell to Spain, while his siblings Princess Charlotte and Prince Louis watched from home in personalized jerseys.

Politics

Jamaal Bowman's Loss Doesn’t Lend Itself to Easy Conclusions

The congressman was weighed down by a lot more than his Israel criticism. And while Cori Bush may suffer the same fate, that doesn't mean the whole Squad is going down.

Celebrity

Towa Bird Wants to Be a New Kind of Rock Star

On her debut album, American Hero, the 25-year-old queer musician celebrates identity, joins the “lesbian renaissance,” and becomes the representation she never had.

Royals

After Splitting From Charles, Princess Diana Wanted to Celebrate Her Independence. The Summer of 1994 Was When Her New Life Began

It’s been three decades since a crop of new friends, a designer wardrobe, and an enormous amount of good press helped the late Princess of Wales blossom into the woman she wanted to be.

Politics

Pod Save America’s Hosts Are Staying Positive About 2024. That Doesn’t Mean They Don’t Fear the Worst

Jon Favreau and Tommy Vietor discuss the importance of civil engagement in a time of mass cynicism, and explain how Americans can keep finding the comedy in the country’s post-Trump tragedy.