A San Francisco newspaper called Alice Miller Richardson “one of California’s most successful and well-known businesswomen” — in 1910.

Sounds like a pioneer, right? Yet a century later, Richardson is anything but well-known, even in her hometown of Riverside.

Richardson ran the Mission Inn for an astonishing 62 years, but virtually all the acclaim has gone to her brother, Frank Miller, the owner, and with most of the remainder to her husband, Frank Richardson.

“She worked really hard and made this hotel a success. And she got no credit for it,” laments biographer Barbara Ann Burns.

Burns is on a one-woman mission to change that. She researched and wrote a book on Richardson that attempts to give her her due.

After reading Burns’ book, “Suite Alice,” I met her Monday for a chat at — where else? — the Mission Inn. She’ll be speaking at 7 p.m. Thursday at the Main Library, courtesy of the Inlandia Institute, but I didn’t want to wait. Also, no offense to the library’s Community Room, but for ambience it can’t hold a candelabra to the Mission Inn.

Built in 1902, expanded through 1931 and on the National Register of Historic Places, the hotel evokes Spanish missions and European castles in its designs, art and decorative touches. It’s drawn presidents, celebrities and plain folks to Riverside for more than a century.

Burns and I talked on a rooftop patio outside Alice’s old quarters, across the courtyard from Frank’s. In two decades as a hotel docent or as director of docent training, Burns says, she didn’t learn much about Alice, who died in 1938, three years after her brother.

“I had heard of Alice. She was just Frank’s little sister,” Burns says.

Common sense, though, told her that Miller had his hand in so many projects to improve and promote Riverside, not to mention his international travels and art-buying expeditions, that he couldn’t have been that involved in the day-to-day business of the hotel.

Burns got permission from Miller biographer Maurice Hodgen to look at his files, and about all that he had on Alice were comments by Frank. Experts in Lake Tahoe and Laguna Beach, two cities where Alice also had been active, had never heard of her.

“Then it became a challenge,” Burns says, a gleam in her eye.

She found that Bay Area newspapers had several reports about Alice, as did travel writers who stayed at the Mission Inn and singled her out.

“It was Alice, Frank Miller’s sister…who acted as the hostess of the Inn,” Elbert Hubbard wrote in 1907. “Alice was a friend, confidant and advisor to the thousands of persons who have stepped across the hospitable threshold of the Mission Inn. She made warm friendships with guests that lasted down through the years.”

When she died, her Riverside Daily Press obituary was headlined “Beloved Aunt Alice of the Mission Inn is mourned by thousands.” The story called her “one of California’s foremost women.”

For much of her tenure, though, she was not on the books as the manager, even if she was doing the manager’s work. (Any working women reading this may be nodding in sympathy.)

She had responsibility for the hotel almost from the start. The Miller family took in boarders starting in 1874 after the town’s hotel burned. By the next year, Alice was in charge of what was known as the Glenwood Inn. She was all of 15 years old.

Frank, then 23, bought the property in 1880 when his father wanted to sell it, and he hired a man named Frank Richardson to help run it. When Richardson married Alice in 1885, he replaced her as manager.

Alice didn’t regain the title of manager until after her husband’s 1906 death. Or as Burns’ book phrases it in an exasperated section heading: “Did someone have to die before Alice got any credit?”

“I don’t think it would have been proper for a woman to be the boss of her husband,” Burns explains. “She agreed to it. I’m surprised he agreed to it. I thought he was a better man than that.”

As that comment hints, Burns is definitely stanning for Alice, who also spent six summers building up Lake Tahoe’s first destination hotel during the Mission Inn’s off-season and snapped up Laguna Beach real estate.

Alice set the hotel’s tone, took visitors on tours of the city, made introductions and penned thank-you notes to guests.

Contributing to her historical anonymity was that in the custom of the day she was often referred to as “Mrs. Frank Richardson,” and she considered her work at the hotel a partnership with her brother, whom she loved dearly.

When the crumbling Mission Inn was restored in the 1980s and ’90s, Burns says, Frank Miller became the focus of attention as a way to honor his contributions to Riverside and simplify the history. Fair enough, but that didn’t leave room for Alice.

“There were a lot of women involved in local history, and they still bought into the idea that Frank did it all by himself,” Burns says. “I didn’t think he could possibly have done all the things people gave him credit for.”

At the hotel, her fourth-floor rooms, where a door mantel is inscribed “Aunt Alice,” are available to guests. A stained-glass window in the Spanish Art Gallery depicts her as St. Martha, patron saint of hospitality. That’s about it for recognition.

A painting in the lobby by William Wendt is of a landscape in Laguna Beach. As Burns discovered, one of the two cottages was Alice’s, a detail not reflected in the display card. Wendt was Alice’s neighbor.

Of Frank Miller, Burns reflects: “He was a big personality. Everybody contributed to letting Frank take all the credit. If you have a choice as to who to give credit to, you give the man credit.”

brIEfly

There I was in the lobby of the Mission Inn on Monday when a voice asked, “Are you doing some reporting?” I turned and who should be standing there but John Valdivia, the mayor of San Bernardino. Why was he in Riverside at its showpiece hotel? A campaign fundraiser. I’m skipping Wednesday’s San Bernardino City Council meeting, but now that the council is in my life, apparently I can’t get away from them.

You’ll bump into David Allen here Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Email dallen@scng.com, phone 909-483-9339, like davidallencolumnist on Facebook and follow @davidallen909 on Twitter.