Peter Harvey writes; “Some people have thought me mad when I have talked about the Shakespeare connection with St Helens, but, as part of the preparation work for the Guides and their new venture for their Centenary year, I have undertaken to take a walking tour of Prescot with a group of Guides and their leaders”.

Peter then points out several items. Shakespeare North aims to create an iconic landmark building, The Cockpit, in the centre of Prescot, to commemorate Knowsley's Elizabethan history and connection with William Shakespeare.

The book “Lancastrian Shakespeare” explores the network of social, political and spiritual connections in North West England during Shakespeare's formative years, and Charles Nevin’s excellent book, “Lancashire, where women die of love”, devotes a chapter to Shakespeare’s links with this area.

Now by co-incidence, when I was involved in the recent Cody centenary aviation event on Eccleston Hill, someone told me that one of the barns across the fields in Burrows Lane, had a long standing tale that Shakespeare and his troupe had once performed and/or rehearsed there.

Peter also tells that “When we (The Townships Family History Society) were doing the history of the Rainford family, they pointed out that Mary Arden, who was Shakespeare's mother, was a Rainford from the Irish side of the family.

The Shakespeare connection with Knowsley and the Stanleys is well accepted.

The proximity of Mossborough Hall, claimed by the Rainfords as their house in this area, to Knowsley Hall, and their association in great battles of long ago alongside Henry the Seventh, lead to the thought that Shakespeare would at least have visited there.

“I had not realised that the Lords Stanley had got quite as close as they did to the throne. There is an excellent book "A Short History of Knowsley Church and the Derby Family”, by Mark Carr, which tells of the descent of the Earls of Derby and how close they were to inheriting the throne at the time of Edward and Elizabeth.”

A contemporary link is that De La Salle School is taking part in the Royal Shakespeare Company’s national flagship education project, and as part they are hosting a Regional Shakespeare Festival, in which a number of local schools are performing.

The Festival will be based on Julius Caesar.