Our Vision

At St John Fisher, we strive to create a school community where children and adults achieve their full potential and SHINE! We will achieve this through engagement, high expectations and by treating all with respect and dignity.

On behalf of the pupils, staff and governors I would like to warmly welcome you to St. John Fisher Catholic Primary and Nursery School’s website.

I hope that you find the pages you need on your website visit today and that you gain an insight into the learning and enrichment that takes place in our school every day. Our values and vision underpin all of what we do.

As a Catholic school we offer our children the opportunity to grow as young people and encourage them to develop a closer relationship with God, in an atmosphere of mutual love and respect. Jesus is central to all that we do, and this is entwined through our Curriculum and celebrated daily through Prayer and Liturgy.

We are a thriving one form entry Catholic Primary School, set in the centre of Knowsley Village. Our school is supported by a strong partnership with The Archdiocese of Liverpool, Knowsley Council and the Parish of St John Fisher and St Columba. We have a supportive Governing Body that guides the work of the school with challenge and passion and want only the very best for our children.

We are fortunate to have such a talented and dedicated staff who provide an outstanding quality of care and encourage all our children to aspire to achieve their full potential. We are passionate about raising standards for all our children and provide them with the best education. We teach a broad curriculum that is engaging and creative, as well as purposeful and adapted to meet the needs of all our children. Our Curriculum will not only support and challenge them, but enable them to become independent and confident learners, whilst equipping them with the skills they will need both academically and socially.

We aim to foster close partnerships with parents and carers, governors and the local community and parish. All of whom play a vital part in the life of our school.

I hope our website will provide you with a taste of our school as well as a source of regular updated information. You can see daily updates of activities and learning by following the links to each Blog featured on the main page.

Please feel free to contact the school directly with any queries you may have.

Mrs C. Lewis

Headteacher