The Italian company Impresa Pizzarotti, the new main contractor of the Portonovi resort, will bring a new dynamic to the implementation of the project, which aims to set the highest quality standards not only in the region, but also in the world, announced the CEO of Azmont Investments, Rashad Aliyev.

"Intensive works in Portonovo continue. Earthworks and works on the marina are underway, while the preparatory works of the ground for the first One&Only hotel in Europe are nearing completion," Aliyev said in an interview with the Mina-business agency.

He reminded that the company Impresa Pizzarotti & CSPA was recently chosen as the main contractor among the many interested parties who participated in the tender and offered their expertise.

Aliyev said that Azmont Investments has already done a lot to create Portonovi and promote Montenegro as a high-luxury destination, but also that the company has a lot of work to do.

"While we are working on the creation of Portonovi Resort, what people see is actually only construction, and that is only part of the whole story. We are doing our best, and it is in our interest, that everything be finished as soon as possible. However, we believe in quality and adequate planning and execution," Aliyev announced.

He added that Azmont Investments' way of working is close to Japanese, where two-thirds of the effort and time is spent on planning, and the rest on execution.

"Despite many rumors, everything is going as planned and we are satisfied with the progress so far," said Aliyev.

According to him, Azmont Investments is working intensively to attract a clientele that demands the highest standards, which will be welcomed by Portonovi in ​​Montenegro, just at the entrance to the magnificent Boka.

"Already in the season of 2017, you will have the opportunity to see the first visitors, and in the season of 2018, we expect the opening of the One&Only hotel. People will enjoy Portonova, regardless of whether the reason for their arrival is a hotel, vacation in their own apartment or they will visit us with friends and drink coffee in Portonovo", said Aliyev.

He reminded that the previous investment of Azmont Investments has been increased more than twice and that from the arrival on the market in September 2013 until the same month of this year, it reached 127 million euros.

Aliyev added that the planned investment for the period of four years, that is, until the next one, amounts to 52 million euros, and for eight years, that is, until 2020, 258 million euros.

"That is only the financial side of our investments. In addition to this, I believe that our contribution is much greater because every day together with our partners we invest in the education and development of employees, especially focusing our efforts on education and development of expertise in areas where we can offer a good exchange of knowledge and experiences", said Aliyev.

He believes that Azmont Investments is a committed investor and that the company's interest in supporting the local community is unquestionable.

"We are cooperating with the Government and its institutions, and I believe that there are joint initiatives and programs ahead of us that will further strengthen education," said Aliyev.

He said that Portonovi as a project is very complex for many reasons, but also challenging at the same time, which engages and motivates.

"We often say that Portonovi is much more than a project, because we create an authentic lifestyle. When you have such a great ambition and goal to position Montenegro on the world map of high-luxury tourism, you have a lot of work and always open questions that need to be resolved. I would rather called work dynamics rather than problems," said Aliyev.

He added that Azmont Investments is happy to have good business partners, as well as the support of the Government and local authorities.

"We see this as a significant basis for our joint success. The moment we finish Portonovi, we have a much more important, and to be honest, a more difficult task ahead of us - to manage it and perform according to expectations," said Aliyev.

He believes that working together is an important factor for long-term success.

"Portonov's success will not only be ours, but also the success of Montenegro and beautiful Boka. As I said, we are happy to have great partners with whom we share the vision and work dedicatedly to achieve our goals," said Aliyev.

He stated that Azmont Investments is an investor with a clear vision and ambition to be a world-class company working to create an exclusive multipurpose resort, according to world standards, as Portonovi will be.

"Our attention is focused on that, and we are also looking for other investment opportunities. As we announced recently, we are entering the financial sector and after the approval of the Central Bank (CBCG), we are opening a bank in Montenegro. This literally means that people in Montenegro will have many more opportunities for employment," said Aliyev.

He said that he believes that the company will in a short time build a reputation as a company that everyone wants to work for.

“Now we have a great team of people working with us and we are proud of that. Also, we invest a lot in creating such an atmosphere where our employees are also proud to be with us", concluded Aliyev.

Gallery