Will Rogers (born November 4, 1879, Cherokee Territory, U.S. [near present-day Claremore, Oklahoma]—died August 15, 1935, near Point Barrow, Alaska) was an American entertainer, radio personality, film actor, and writer who was famous for his pithy and homespun humour and social commentary.

Rogers learned how to ride a horse and do rope tricks while growing up on a ranch in what would eventually become Oklahoma. He worked in various Wild West shows in the United States and overseas, and in 1905 he displayed his roping skills at a show at Madison Square Garden. The good reviews he received for the engagement prompted his decision to stay in New York City and work in vaudeville. Upon discovering that audiences loved his Western drawl, he began to ad-lib patter in his previously silent act. Rogers appeared in his first Broadway show, The Wall Street Girl, in 1912 and demonstrated his roping skills between acts. He did the same in a few less successful shows in 1915, but he impressed producer Flo Ziegfeld enough to be hired later that year for the cast of Ziegfeld’s Midnight Frolic.

Britannica Quiz

Pop Culture Quiz

To keep his act fresh, Rogers poked fun at prominent audience members and commented on the events of the day, especially political news. Gently kidding Democrats and Republicans alike, Rogers became a master of the political one-liner, such as “Every time Congress makes a joke it’s law, and every time they make a law it’s a joke.” From Midnight Frolic, Rogers moved to the prestigious Ziegfeld Follies on Broadway in 1916, a yearly production to which he frequently returned until 1925.

In 1918 Rogers starred in his first film, Laughing Bill Hyde. Though Rogers would never admit to being anything but an amateur actor, critics appreciated his natural charm and appealingly plain face. For the next few years, he appeared in silent features for producer Sam Goldwyn, as well as several comedies he produced himself and a series of Hal Roach two-reelers that made light of Hollywood and Washington. Rogers wrote books, articles, and a syndicated newspaper column; he frequently performed on radio and was a popular after-dinner speaker.

In 1929 Rogers signed a movie contract with the Fox Film Corporation and made his first talking picture, They Had to See Paris. Sound films obviously suited the talkative Rogers, and his popular films made him a bigger star than ever before. His more notable sound films included A Connecticut Yankee (1931), based on Mark Twain’s humorous novel, and State Fair (1933).