The Australian Fabians have published some interesting videos.

Having a job is the traditional entry point into adult social life. What you do so frequently defines who you are that they are hard to separate. Work and a meaningful life are almost inextricably bound together in most people's thinking.

Yet if work is diminishing and the work that remains for the majority becomes meaningless, low status and simply that which machines cannot do, where can we find a meaningful attachment to wider society? If the options for almost any kind of employment are reduced by technology and globalisation, how can people retain their dignity and place in society?

Possibilities include a new twist on co-operatives, voluntary work enhancing civil society or the introduction of a universal basic income. This event discusses some of the alternative options for a meaningful work life, decoupled perhaps from the traditional job market, or perhaps from the economic necessity of work.

Emma Kerin, National Union of Workers Media Communications Organiser, speaks on Co-operative work and worker co-operatives, another alternative to work as it is currently understood.

Have you joined the Fabian Society yet?

The Fabian Society is Britain’s leading left of centre think tank and political society, committed to creating the political ideas and policy debates which can shape the future of progressive politics. With over 300 Fabian MPs, MEPs, Peers, MSPs and AMs, the Society plays an unparalleled role in linking the ability to influence policy debates at the highest level with vigorous grassroots debate among our growing membership of over 7000 people, 70 local branches meeting regularly throughout Britain and a vibrant Young Fabian section organising its own activities. Fabian publications, events and ideas therefore reach and influence a wider audience than those of any comparable think tank. The Society is unique among think tanks in being a thriving, democratically-constituted membership organisation, affiliated to the Labour Party but organisationally and editorially independent. For over 120 years Fabians have been central to every important renewal and revision of left of centre thinking. The Fabian commitment to open and participatory debate is as important today as ever before as we explore the ideas, politics and policies which will define the next generation of progressive politics in Britain, Europe and around the world. To find out more about the Fabian Society, the Young Fabians, the Fabian Women’s Network and our local societies, please visit our web site at www.fabians.org.uk.