They are the policy engine for the main parties. There is often a cross-transfer of people - policy strategists may leave think-tanks to work on a party campaign. After the election, expect new government advisers and SpAds be recruited from think tanks - and vice-versa.

5654 & Company’s Maike Erb, who sits on the executive committee of the Young Fabians Economy and Finance policy network gives an overview of the think tanks that matter:

Tony Blair Institute (TBI)

While Tony Blair himself remains a divisive figure in the Labour Party, the former Prime Minister has an “open phone line” to Starmer. The TBI is increasingly influential on Labour policy development: research and policy recommendations of the TBI – which span from foreign policy, economic growth, to Artificial Intelligence and education – are already being reflected in Labour policy development.

The Fabian Society

Founded in 1884, the Fabian Society remains an influential left-of-centre think tank. The Fabian Society is well-connected into the Labour Shadow Cabinet – Keir Starmer used to be a member of the Fabian Society’s executive committee. With Wes Streeting, Anneliese Dodds and Seema Malhotra, three important Labour frontbenchers sit on the current executive committee of the Fabian Society.

Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR)

Founded after Labour’s defeat in 1987, the IPPR is a left-leaning and influential think tank. Via its offshoots, IPPR North and IPPR Scotland, the think tank develops regional policy ideas and public policy, as well as ‘national’ ideas.

Labour Together

A relatively new and increasingly influential think tank which was founded with the aim to make Labour electable again after its years under Jeremy Corbyn. Several Labour frontbenchers– Rachel Reeves, Bridget Phillipson, Wes Streeting, Lisa Nandy, Lucy Powell and Jim McMahon – were involved in the formation of Labour Together. As a result, Labour Together is already well-connected across the Labour Party – Rachel Reeves launched Labour’s economic policy framework “securonomics” with Labour Together and the think tank’s inaugural summer reception hosted together with the New Statesman was well-attended by Shadow frontbenchers, MPs, political advisers, members of the Whitehall lobby and businesses alike.

Labour for the Long Term

Another upcoming Labour policy think tank, which aims to promote the development of long-term policy thinking within the Labour Party across a range of policy areas including technology and AI, the economy, housing and foreign policy.

Reform

A liberal think tank which focuses on evidence-based public services policy thinking. Reform is influential across the political spectrum – Conservative Peer and former Secretary of State Nicky Morgan chairs the think tank’s advisory board, of which Labour MP Dame Meg Hillier is also a member. 5654 & Company Partner, Robert Nisbet, is also a member of Reform’s advisory board.”

Onward

Now run by former FT political correspondent Seb Payne, Onward was founded by the Prime Minister’s deputy chief of staff Will Tanner and is close to the PM’s policy advisers. On the centre right, Onward is one of the most influential think tanks on the current government and is forging links with others, including the Tony Blair Institute.

CPS

Run by Robert Colvile, one of the architects of the 2019 Conservative manifesto. The Centre for Policy Studies is now long established on the right of politics and continues to be a force in policy development across the Conservative Party.