Jamie Lynn Spears was proud to earn a new achievement in her ever-growing resume as she received a spot on the National Best Sellers list with her memoir Things I Should Have Said.

The 30-year-old actress took to Instagram with the announcement that her 256-page tome earned accolades, after already topping the Christian Inspirational best sellers list last week.

Jamie Lynn wrote on social media: 'I can’t believe I’m officially a NATIONAL BEST SELLING AUTHOR! I have no words except how grateful I am that I was able share my story with y’all.

'This has been one of the most challenging and vulnerable things I have ever done and I just honestly can’t thank y’all enough for the support and kindness.'

She has been publicly battling back-and-forth with her older sister, Britney, after the Toxic singer's attorney, Mathew S. Rosengart, issued a cease-and-desist against the younger Spears, ordering her to stop talking about Britney on her book tour.

'I have so many people to thank for making this dream of mine to write and share my own story actually come true,' she captioned a series of photos last week.

'I'm overwhelmed by the support that has made it such a success, but what's most fulfilling is the connection I feel to each of you when I read all the messages from y'all sharing your own stories with me. You're not alone. You matter. Your voice matters. Thank you for letting me share mine with you- love y'all soo much.'

Jamie took to her stories and showed off a few grabs from the lists with the cover of her book appearing on an exclusive best sellers group just days after it was released amid a slate of controversy.

Britney posted another blistering attack on Jamie Lynn Wednesday and called her a 'selfish brat' who once refused to play with her after she had split up with ex-boyfriend Justin Timberlake. At the time, Britney was around 21, while younger sister Jamie Lynn would have been 11-years-old.

After initially deleting her Tuesday post — whereby Britney, 40, said she should have 'slapped' her sister Jamie Lynn, 30, and mother Lynne Spears — she has now re-posted an even longer version with new details.

'You selfish little brat !!!' Britney fumes in her notes. 'Saying how weird and dumb it was that I bought a house for Mamma !!!! She was so proud and you told that interview girl that it was just weird … LIKE I GUESS I WILL JUST WALK IN THESE HALLS … Why did you say that ???'

She also continues to deny Jamie Lynn's accusation that she once 'grabbed a knife' and locked them in a room together, which was shared in a recent interview on ABC's Nightline.

Britney writes: 'And the topic about the knife which is ironically the only lie you've ever told in your whole life ... Why is that conversation 20 min ??? and the most degrading to me ... OH BUT you don't want to keep talking about it because you don't want to HURT ANYBODY'S feelings ... yet you let it linger forever saying you felt unsafe with me and WEIRD ... f**k you Jamie Lynn !!!!'

The pop singer paints a picture of their fractured relationship in her lengthy post, hinting that she was jealous that Jamie Lynn had an easier childhood.

Britney's legal team ordered Jamie Lynn to stop discussing the pop star's life and struggles when she's giving interviews to promote her new memoir.

Jamie Lynn is currently on a promotional tour for her new book which Britney's legal counsel said contains 'misleading and outrageous claims' about her.

In November, Britney was finally granted freedom from the 13-year conservatorship her father, Jamie Spears, had managed following multiple mental health breakdowns which began in 2007.