July 9, 2021

She can't act, she can't sing, she can't write. Her only talent is enslaving her sister and exploiting her.

July 9, 2021

DO NOT BUY THIS BOOK!!!! YOU WILL BE SUPPORTING AN EVIL MANIPULATIVE TWO-FACED PERSON!!! Jamie Lynn is the infamous sister of the more famous mega superstar Britney Spears, who just recently expressed, under oath in a court, that her family should be jailed for the abuse and exploitation of her life that they have done a great job at. Buying this book means you support the ongoing abuse and violation of Britney’s human rights. While Jamie Lynn is free to write this trash of a memoir continuing to exploit Britney’s situation for a paycheck. Jamie Lynn should be ashamed of herself. Just remember that the Spears name would be NOTHING without Britney. Keep riding that gravy train honey because your stop is coming up real soon!

July 10, 2021

Funny how for someone who ABSOLUTELY DOESNT DEPEND on her sister’s money or name they decide to use one of said sister’s most iconic song lyrics LOL. Jamie Lynn would absolutely not be here if Britney Spears wasn’t around, we all know that.

July 11, 2021

Narcissistic failed star writes a book to get attention and paint herself a victim after being complicit in her sister's horrific abuse for thirteen years. Is there anything more pathetic and hypocritical?

July 11, 2021

An absolutely disgusting way to keep profiting of her sister.

July 9, 2021

Wish i could rate it 0 stars but i don’t have that option. #FreeBritney

October 13, 2021

Tell me you're a psychopath without telling me you're a psychopath!

The only reason she ever even got the small bit of famous she is was because of Britney and she needs to just go off with herself and live in obscurity and/or prison!

Read

February 17, 2022

Aparte de que esta mujer tiene la vida menos interesante solo dice pura mamada.

La verdad no me voy. detener mucho en esta reseña. Si soy honesto solo lo leí por el morbo y porque quería ver que tanto llegaba a decir esta mujer de Britney Spears. Fuera de eso puedo confirmar que la J*ime tine una vida demasiado aburrida. De verdad, para ser una celebridad, no tiene nada de interesante, por lo que no entiendo porque sacar una autobiografía cuando tu renombre e impacto es mínimo.

No lo voy a calificar porque 1) es una biografía entonces esta medio dificl calificar la vida de alguien (incluso cuando J*ime no merece derechos) y 2) porque de verdad no podría importarme menos.

Para cerrar puedo decir que it's on sight Jaime Lynn. Ojalá Britney te suelte un putazo mientras My Prerogative suena de fondo por haber lucrado con su nombre y por haberte aprovechado de la situación. Karma's a bitch 😘

July 18, 2021

Free Britney, and I hope this book flops.

For a run down of some things Jamie Lynn has done:

-She scammed her fans with a Zoey 101 reboot that was never going to happen

-She ran over her cats with her Tesla and tried to blame Elon Musk

-It’s largely believed that she may have something to gain from her sister’s conservatorship

-And now she wants to make money from a book that she knows will only sell because of her sister’s ongoing abuse under her conservatorship (which is really fucking low).

October 13, 2021

Turns out she can’t limit or disable these comments like she does everything else 🤣. Don’t buy

July 10, 2021

If I could rate this negative I would. Not worth the purchase and time. Subpar at best.

July 21, 2021

Garbage book by a garbage woman. Don’t waste your money… in fact, save it for the Britney tell-all when Jamie-Lynn is in prison with her daddy :).

March 25, 2023

dont support abusers who gladly took part in the abuse while of sound mind and refuse to apologize.

July 12, 2021

Do not buy this book!

Another attempt for the Spears family to capitalise on the pain and abuse of Britney

February 5, 2022

I don't usually write reviews but I just have to for this one. I honestly don't understand why there are so many poor reviews. I don't think they actually read this book? (Or maybe they did, but they didn't with an open mind?)

This book had me in tears when Jamie Lynn explained in detail what happened to her daughter, Maddie.

Overall, the biggest take away I got from reading this book is that both Britney and Jamie Lynn have dealt with immense trauma from a very young age & have had inconsistent support from their parents (or anyone) and neither knew who they could truly trust as they were growing up.

Often times while they were growing up, they both went days into weeks without one or both of their parents.

If you read this with an open mind, it shows how two amazing ladies have both been through so much (and they are still going through so much). They both deserve love & support, as does anyone who has been through so much emotional trauma and instability.

And this definitely isn't even close to a "tell all" about Britney. I'd say maybe 10-15% of this book is talking about Britney. It seems more like Jamie Lynn sharing her own early childhood (which she credits Britney for always being an amazing big sister).

Praying they both find internal peace & happiness.

February 20, 2022

I wish I could give it 0 stars

This book is the representation of a narcissistic person who always wants to be in the position of "victim" even in situations in which she wasn't involved and were just Britney situations.

She practically implied that her family (which had already been destroyed since before Britney's fame by her alcoholic dad and permissive mom) was damaged thanks to Britney. She loved portraying Britney as "paranoid", "unstable", "erratic" and not to mention the reasons why Britney was/is angry about the shitty family she has.

She wants basically everyone to say "Oh poor JL, she had a hard time seeing how her sister has been controlled and abused all her life, without being the owner of her life, having to ask permission for minimal things, forcing her to work, silencing her, exploiting here like a machine, not letting her be a mom again, locking her against her will in psychiatric centers and wrongly medicating her against her will. Yes, We have to feel very bad for JL, she definitely suffered so much while she did nothing to help her having the possibility of doing it".

Girl, I can't believe you had the AUDACITY to post this. I have no sympathy for abusers. This was purely written to benefit you one more time from your sister. We believe in Britney and we will always support her.

October 12, 2021

Jamie Lynn talks about mental health, and how a portion of the money received from book sales will go to some charity supporting mental health. BUT ironically, Jamie Lynn is complicit in the trauma and abuse that her sister Britney Spears has (and continues to) suffered from her entire "family". Jamie Lynn likes to take any blame or responsibility off of her, but she is far from an angel.

SUPPORTING JAMIE LYNN IS SUPPORTING THE ABUSE OF BRITNEY SPEARS.

October 11, 2021

I would rather rip my own uterus out and eat it all in one sitting than read this piece of shit xxxxxxxxx

January 17, 2022

Absolute dumpster fire. I actually read the book from start to finish just to ensure I was reading everything correctly. I shall now include some of my favorite quotes:

- “Momma continued with her stern manner of parenting me, but it felt as if she had a different set of standards for my older siblings.” - in which Jamie Lynn still resents her siblings who are 9 and 12 years older for getting more freedoms than her when she was little…

- The entire chapter about Jamie Lynn’s pregnancy describes how difficult it was for her to be isolated away without access to phones or the ability to go out freely. The point? She missed it?

- “In the court of public opinion, if you are a member of the Spears family, you are labeled detestable and reprehensible. I am guilty of loving my whole family and wanting what is best for all of them.”

- “The world will hear many things. Some of them may be true and others may serve respective purposes. You won’t hear anything from me.” - Didn’t she just give a Good Morning América interview?

- “Britney’s description about the way she has been managed and treated does nothing to break the cycle. All of us have to manage our lives and struggles the best way we see fit.” SHE SAID THAT!

Anyway, that was an entertaining three hours, I think I’ll go scream now.

July 15, 2021

such a big fan. loved her in... in... anyway, can't wait to read this yet untitled book to hear her inspiring story.

''I must confess, I still believe (Still believe)

When I'm not with you, I lose my mind

Give me a sign

Hit me, baby, one more time

Oh, baby, baby (Oh)

Oh, baby, baby (Yeah)

Oh, baby, baby

How was I supposed to know?

Oh, pretty, baby

I shouldn't have let you go

I must confess that my loneliness is killing me now

Don't you know I still believe

That you will be here and give me a sign

Hit me, baby, one more time''

October 12, 2021

I think this book is the story about a corrupt family and how they stayed silent witnessing abuse, exploitation and human trafficking all because they’re greedy and overall bad people.

Allegedly.

Wouldn’t recommend reading this book.

Read

July 20, 2021

You suck Jamie. Crawl in a hole and never come out. I hope your sister jerks a knot in your hair. You and this book-DUMB. You are one audacious, soulless monster. Your daughter needs to be taken from you and you should be placed under a conservatorship for allowing you kid to crash an ATV into a pond and flinging a knife around making threats in a restaurant. But wait, you aren’t really talented enough to bring in that amount of cash to begin with. I hope you get everything you deserve. We all hate you and your dad. #FreeBritney

P.S. you are the ugly sister, inside and out.

July 24, 2021

Such a shame to publish this book and make money out of Spears conservatorship

October 12, 2021

Jamie Lynn Spears has been living of her sister's money for over a decade, being an adult. She has seen Britney go through hell without saying a word about the abuse and torture and is now trying to make her last coins using the media attention her sister's receiving because of her conservatorship case. Let's not buy or read this book.

August 28, 2021

I thought this was an incorrect title?? That's what the publisher said. Why is this title still on your site?? Capitalizing off her sister who is in the fight of her life. Disgusting.

October 11, 2021

If she's trying to confess, why not also confess how she abused and used her sister for her entire life? How she's acomplice in mental, physical and health abuse of her sister, publicly lying about her and telling everyone she's fine. She doesn't deserve to hold a pen, nor to write a book, she deserves to be in jail, along with her family for abusing Britney. If you intend to buy any of Jamie's books, which I doubt, then stop and use that money to donate to charity instead.