Producers Releasing Corporation (PRC) is not a household name, but it played an important role in the U.S. theatrical market during its run from 1939–1947.[1] At the time, the Big Five[2] and The Little Three[3] dominated US theatrical production, distribution, and exhibition[4], while smaller studios and independent producers turned out a significant number of B-movies[5] and theatrical serials. The smaller companies were collectively known as the “Poverty Row”[6]producers. Among these, PRC was one of the four largest and most successful during its time, along with Monogram Pictures (1931–1953), Republic Pictures (1935–1967), and Grand National (1936–1939).

Like its Poverty Row brethren, PRC ran on a very tight budget. A typical production schedule only allowed five or six days of principal photography to shoot an entire feature film,[7] compared to an average scooting schedule of 106 days for a contemporary Hollywood theatrical feature.[8] As a result, PRC films were not what one would call high quality, but they still managed to find an audience. According to Don Miller[9] (who actually has a great fondness for PRC’s work):

Defects abounded in every department. Performances would rate with a high school dramatics society under stress. Direction would consist of pointing the camera in a particular area and shouting “Action!” and hoping for the best; and the camera, when pointed, might be out of focus. Sets would shimmy and shake if an actor slammed a door upon entering. … But the stories, or the titles, or something — there was always something to sell.

At the bottom of PRC’s barrel were its westerns. Unlike its other films, on which PRC might lavish six days of principal photography, many of its westerns were shot in two or three days. They were the shortest of PRCs films, typically 54 minutes long. Its longer films – mysteries, dramas, action films, and musicals – averaged 75 minutes with none longer than 87 minutes.[10] To save money, actors often read their lines from cue cards – which were not always off camera – and the first take was usually the only take. Their productions averaged a shooting ratio of 1.5:1. That is, only about 100 minutes of film were shot for a 60 to 80-minute feature. At the time, the typical shooting ratio for the majors was 10:1. Even Alfred Hitchcock, famous for his meticulous planning and low shooting ratios, still shot at around 3:1. For comparison, Gone Girl (2014) had a shooting ratio of about 200:1.[11]

One of the limiting factors for PRC was that it released its films on the “States Rights” basis. That is, they sold their films for a flat fee to local distributors who would then rent the pictures to exhibitors within an exclusive territory. This had the advantage of guaranteeing PRC a fixed income per film, regardless of how well or poorly the film did at the box office, but this meant that PRC’s total profit was also strictly limited. In the end, they only earned around $1,750 in profit per film.[12] This made it very hard for PRC to break out of the niche it had carved for itself.

In a certain respect, these restrictions also played to PRC’s advantage, setting its dramatic works apart from the slick productions of the Majors and giving them a particular sense of immediacy and realism not often found elsewhere, as evidenced by the film noir classics Bluebeard (1944), Strange Illusion (1945) and Detour (1945).

Just as PRC was starting to gain critical attention (it earned five Academy Award nominations for three different films in 1944 and 1945[13]), it was purchased by J Arthur Rank and folded into Eagle-Lion Films in 1947. Even so, its works live on in the EIDR Content ID registry where you will find permanent reference for the 276 motion pictures PRC produced or distributed during its nine-year run.

[1] Originally founded as Producers Pictures by Ben Judell. In relatively short order it became Producers Distributing Corporation, then Producers Releasing Corporation, and finally best known as simply PRC.

[2] Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Paramount Pictures, RKO Pictures, 20th Century-Fox, and Warner Bros.

[3] United Artists, Columbia Pictures, Universal Studios.

[4] Until the “Paramount Decree” (United States vs. Paramount Pictures, Inc., 334 U.S. 131) broke up the Hollywood studio system c. 1948.

[5] Originally, the second half of a double-feature (together, the A- and B-movies), but more generically a low-budget, low-quality film with little or no redeeming value.

[6] Originally a reference to motion picture production and distribution companies with offices along Gower Blvd. in Hollywood, but later a generic catch-all for the smaller – and often short-lived – companies that turned out the low-budget movies that helped fill out the second half of theatrical double-bills. PRC’s officers actually were on Gower Blvd. before moving to Santa Monica Blvd. in 1943.

[7] Per Edgar G. Ulmer, a popular PRC director.

[8] See “How long does the average Hollywood movie take to make?” by Stephen Follows.

[9] Writing in Producers Releasing Corporation: A Comprehensive Filmography and History edited by Wheeler Dixon.

[10] Films destined for the second slot in a double-feature were often quite short.

[11] Part of the high shooting ratio has to do with the cost fundamentals of shooting on film vs. shooting digital. See “Shooting Ratios, From Hitchcock to ‘Fury Road’ to ‘Primer’ (and What They Mean to You)”

[12] Or the equivalent of around $34,000 today, adjusted for inflation.

[13] Interestingly, all for music – score and song for Minstrel Man (1944), score for The Man Who Walked Alone (1945), and score and song for Why Girls Leave Home (1945) – despite the fact that most of PRC’s musicals were “glittering tacky packages of third-rate stars, with fifth-rate music.”

The PRC Film Library