The 19 members of the Presidential Search Committee

Dianne Byrum — Byrum was elected to the Board of Trustees in 2008 and 2016. She has served as co-director of the Michigan Political Leadership Program, an MSU program that trains future public policy leaders.

Melanie Foster — Foster was elected to the Board in 2004 and 2014. She serves on the Board of Ele's Place.

Debra Bittner — Bittner is president of the Clerical-Technical Union of MSU and works with several unions on campus.

Pero Gaglo Dagbovie — Dagbovie is a university distinguished professor of history and an associate dean at the graduate school. He is going to be the next editor of "The Journal of African American History."

Prabu David — David is dean of the College of Communication Arts and Sciences. He also has been an investigator on projects funeded by the National Cancer Institute, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of State and the Breast Cancer Research Foundation.

Joel Ferguson — Ferguson was elected to the Board in 1986. He is the founder or co-founder of local TV stations WFSL and WLAJ and is an owner and developer of office buildings in the Lansing area.

Mary Finn — Finn is director and professor in the School of Criminal Justice at MSU. She has done much research on public policy responses to violence against women and children.

Thomas Glasmacher — Glasmacher is a university distinguished professor in the Department of Physics and Astronomy. He led the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams team at MSU.

Linda Hubbard — Hubbard is the president and COO of Carhartt, Inc., where she is in charge of connecting all facets of business operations to deliver brand promises.

Tomas Hult — Hult is a professor, Byington endowed chair and director of the International Business Center in the Eli Broad College of Business at MSU.

Dan Kelly — Kelly was elected to the Board for an eight-year term, which began in January 2017. He is a practicing attorney and has more than 25 years' litigation experience with municipalities, school districts and corporate clients.

Leo Kempel — Kempel is an assistant professor at MSU.

Bonnie Knutson — Knutson is a professor in the School of Hospitality Business. She also is serving as MSU's faculty athletic representative to the Big Ten and NCAA.

Wanda Lipscomb — Lipscomb is a tenured associate professor of psychiatry. She also has served on the Women's Advisory Committee to the Provost.

Mark A. Murray — Murray was vice president for Finance and Administration at MSU for a year. He also is a director of DTE Energy and Spectrum Health.

David L. Porteous — Porteous is a member of the Board of Trustees of the Michigan State College of Law. He has practiced law in Michigan for more than 40 years with a focus on corporate and muncipal law.

Katherine Rifiotis — Rifiotis is a senior in the Honors College. She is president of the Associated Students of MSU.