Dianne Byrum was elected the new chairwoman of the Michigan State University Board of University Wednesday, promising the board is ready to embrace “monumental change" in the wake of months of upheaval around the Larry Nassar controversy.

“It’s a new year, a new board and a new page at MSU,” said Byrum, a former Democratic state lawmaker.

That includes more transparency in board governance, she said.

In their first board meeting of 2019, the eight trustees voted 5-3 for Byrum over Trustee Brian Mossallam to head the board for the next two years. Byrum takes over for Brian Breslin, who did not seek re-election in November.

Trustees Joel Ferguson, Melanie Foster, Dan Kelly and Brianna Scott voted for Byrum, while Nancy Schlichting and Kelly Tebay backed Mossallam.

Kelly was unanimously elected vice chair.

The board also voted Wednesday to re-establish a “healing assistance” fund to cover counseling costs for victims of Nassar, the former Michigan State University doctor who molested hundreds of patients over two decades. A $10 million fund was created in December 2017 to reimburse Nassar victims for therapy or counseling costs.

The university discontinued the fund last summer after they reached a $500 million settlement with Nassar victims who sued MSU. However, the fund discontinuation was criticized by many, and the board agreed unanimously Wednesday to ask administration to draw up a proposal for instituting the fund. That proposal is expected to be presented to the board at their February meeting.

“We believed it was the moral thing to do,” Byrum said about re-creating the fund.

Wednesday’s meeting included three new board members. Tebay and Scott were elected in November, replacing Breslin and Mitch Lyons, who did not seek re-election. Schlichtang was appointed last month by then-Gov. Rick Snyder to replace Trustee George Perles, who resigned for health reasons.

The changes mean the board now is majority female, with Democrats in the majority. The Democrats include Byrum, Scott, Tebay, Mossallam and Ferguson. Last year’s board was evenly split between Democrats and Republicans.

Byrum, 64, served in the Michigan Legislature from 1991 to 2006, with stints in both the state House and Senate representing districts in Ingham County. She was first elected to the MSU board in 2008.

She is now a partner in Byrum & Fisk Advocacy Communications, an East Lansing public relations firm.