Trustee Dianne Byrum was elected to head the Michigan State University Board of Trustees on Wednesday, defeating fellow Democrat Brian Mosallam in a move that means a reformer will be in charge — even if many in attendance at the board meeting thought the wrong reformer was picked.

Justin Johnson, an MSU alumnus who ran for the board this year and lost, said the board made the safe choice. Mosallam has been the more vocal of the two, especially in calling for the firing of interim President John Engler.

"She's not the worst choice," Johnson said. "(But) Brian has been very vocal (in his criticism of Engler and the administration). Dianne hasn't been as vocal, even though she voted to fire Engler earlier."

But MSU junior Sara Coles, 21, of Novi liked the move.

"(Byrum) voted for firing Engler." she said while sitting in a coffee shop just off campus studying. "She's done stuff to make changes. I don't care how loud a person is about it. I think she really wants to make the changes that are needed."

Byrum is also the co-chair of the committee conducting the search for a permanent president.

The vote took place after a long week of board members trying to convince each other to vote for their candidate. That campaigning was going hard Wednesday morning.

For two hours, members of the board sat behind closed doors, trying to figure out who was going to be their leader for the next year.

They were deadlocked between two choices — Byrum, who founded and still runs a public relations firm and is a longtime Democratic politician in Michigan, and Mosallam, who runs his own financial advising firm and is a former MSU football player, multiple sources told the Free Press.

Then, as it became clear that the board couldn't decide between the two, Dan Kelly, an attorney and a Republican, switched his vote from Mosallam to Byrum. His reason for the change? If the board couldn't pick, board bylaws mandated the vice-chair from the previous year would become the leader of the board. That would have ushered in as leader Joel Ferguson, a Democrat who has taken tremendous heat from survivors of former MSU doctor Larry Nassar's sexual assaults scandal for public comments downplaying the problems at MSU.

More: No ties, allegiances key in search for Perles replacement on MSU board

More: Election clears some obstacles for those who want Engler out at MSU

When the board finally emerged for the public session, Ferguson was the one who nominated Byrum. He, Melanie Foster, Kelly, Byrum herself and new board member Brianna Scott all voted in her favor. New board members Kelly Tebay and Nancy Schlichting, along with Mosallam, all voted for Mosallam to be chairman.

The decision didn't go over well with the audience of more than 50 people in the room. Several shouted and packed up their bags to leave the meeting, which was still going on. The public had been let into the board room about 9:30 a.m. for what was supposed to be a 10 a.m. meeting.

“As the incoming chair of this board, I am very humbled, very honored to take this responsibility very seriously,” Byrum said. “I am committed to work with all of the trustees on this board so we can facilitate change throughout Michigan State University, understanding that that change will only occur with all of our participation.”

Rachael Denhollander, the first to go public with her sexual assault by Nassar, took to Twitter to express her dismay at the pick.

"Trustee Ferguson has been a huge part of the problem at MSU and attacked survivors with lies multiple times, refusing all efforts to change. Dianne Byrum had to rely on Ferguson and Melanie Foster to get elected, and that tells us everything we need to know about the new chair."

The board chairman position is often a ceremonial post, but offers key advantages to whoever holds the post at MSU.

First is the symbolism of the post. Secondly, the chairman helps set the agenda for each meeting and has the ability to call special meetings of the board.

It's unclear what this does for Engler's future. Byrum voted earlier this year to fire Engler. Mosallam made that motion, but it failed. Byrum and Mosallam were the only two to vote for the motion.

The conversation after the meeting in the hallways and around campus, especially among many critics of MSU, was that the board had punted in placing Byrum in charge.

MSU junior Lisa Williams, 21, of Grand Rapids wasn't at the meeting, but followed along on social media.

"i wish they had picked (Mosallam)," she said. "I think MSU needs a bold choice — someone who would have shaken everything up and put everyone on notice that things really need to change."

Some displeasure was also voiced by the pick of Kelly as vice-chairman.

"I'm hopeful that the trustees can find compassion for survivors and students in their new leadership roles," said Morgan McCaul, a prominent voice among Nassar survivors.

After her election, Byrum didn't talk about specific plans for reform.

She repeated several times that any moves would be done with all members on board, not just from one trustee.

Key for many is the firing of Engler, a plea that was repeated during public comment earlier in the meeting.

"We believe the board should fire Engler," MSU faculty member Anna Pegler Gordon, representing the group ReclaimMSU, said during public comment before the vote on a new chair. She said the group believes Engler has repeatedly lied and been unsympathetic to Nassar survivors.

Engler has been under heavy fire for a variety of issues. He took heat for trying to micromanage the university's communications, including changing the focus of the alumni magazine by scrapping the entire contents of an issue focused on Nassar. He also crafted a statement talking about divulging the details of counseling center visits by a student who sued MSU, a possible violation of federal privacy laws.

Wednesday was the first meeting of the new board. The board has three new members — Tebay and Scott, who won election in November to replace Republicans Brian Breslin, last year's board chairman, and Mitch Lyons, who both decided not to run for re-election.

Also new on the board is Schlichting, who was appointed at the end of December by outgoing Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder, a Republican, to replace George Perles, who retired. Schlichting told the Free Press earlier this month she is a Democrat but feels higher education should be a nonpartisan issue.

Schlichting made the nomination for Mosallam to be chair.

According to MSU, Byrum was elected to the board in 2008 and again in 2016. She is a partner at Byrum & Fisk Advocacy Communications, a public relations firm she founded in 2006, with offices in East Lansing and Grand Rapids. She was the Michigan House Democratic leader in the mid-2000s, the first woman to lead a caucus in Michigan. Byrum was first elected to the Michigan House in 1991 and to the state Senate in 1995, returning to the House in 2002.

Contact David Jesse: 313-222-8815 or djesse@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter: @reporterdavidj