It was nearly 50 years ago that the country and pop music world lost a legendary singer who is still making an impact on artists and music fans throughout the world. Lost in a plane crash in 1963 at the height of her career at the age of 30, Patsy Cline is considered one of the most influential and acclaimed female vocalists of the 20th century.

One only needs to hear her classic recording of the Willie Nelson-penned song Crazy to know that her emotionally expressive voice crosses over to music fans of all genres. It’s no surprise then that contemporary singer-songwriters are still performing her works and paying tribute to this country music legend.

One of those acts paying tribute is The Living Sisters, a Los Angeles-based folk super group of sorts, featuring the vocal and writing talents of Inara George, Becky Stark and Eleni Mandell. George is one-half of the group, The Bird and the Bee, and daughter of Little Feat keyboardist Lowell George. Stark, born in Culver City and raised in Maryland, is the voice behind the group Lavender Diamond. And rounding out the group is Los Angeles native Mandell, whose voice the rest of the nation became familiar with in 2005 when she sang the Cole Porter standard I Love Paris, while watching a scantily clad Paris Hilton wash a car in a Carl’s Jr. television commercial.

The Living Sisters will play in a program put together by the Los Angeles Philharmonic, called The Songbook Series. On Saturday, May 7, at Disney Hall they will feature the songs of Cline. Sharing the stage with the folk trio will be special guests John Doe (former member of influential L.A. rock group X), ex-Garbage lead singer Shirley Manson and actor-musicians Zooey Deschanel and John C. Reilly.

The songbook series is one of several innovative concerts put on by the L.A. Phil, with Judy Collins performing her own songs early next year and Elaine Stritch singing the compositions of Stephen Sondheim on May 19. More information on the series and ticketing can be found at laphil.com. While on the Web page, check out their new video for the song, How Are You Doing, directed by acclaimed French director Michel Gondry (Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and numerous memorable music videos with Bjork, among other projects).

In an attempt to bring back some of the luster to the Westwood Village area, the merchants and community members have put together a monthly celebration of culture, cuisine and cinema with live music, wine, cocktails and food tastings on the third Thursday of every month. The inaugural launching of Westwood Live will begin at 5 p.m., April 21, with food and wine-themed movies like Bottleshock and Sideways being screened at the Napa Valley Grille. With the purchase of a $10 ticket, guests can enjoy unlimited bites of the restaurant’s seasonal cuisine and three drink tastings from California vintners and mixologists until 9 p.m. More info on the event can be found at westwoodlive.org/.

Jazz continues in Culver City this month with three shows at the Culver Club, inside the Radisson Hotel Westside on Centinela Avenue near Sepulveda Boulevard. On Friday, April 15, celebrate tax day with the Billy Mitchell Quartet, featuring the leader on piano and vocals, along with Jeannie Tatum assisting with vocal chores. Then on the following Friday, April 22, alto sax player and L.A. studio vet Eric Marienthal will hit the stage with his quartet.

Rounding out the month of April will be veteran alto sax kingpin Richie Cole, whose illustrious career includes performances with the big bands of Buddy Rich, Lionel Hampton, Doc Severinsen and more. There are two shows – 7:30 p.m. and 9:30 p.m., with a $10 cover charge. Reservations are recommended. Call (310) 649-1776, ext. 4137 for reservations, or check out radisson.com/culvercity for more information.

The Super Serious show returns to Culver City this month on Thursday, April 21, with comedy, music, free beer and food trucks. The Super Serious Show is a monthly live comedy show which takes place at Smashbox Studios, a photography and film studio located in the Hayden Tract area of Culver City.

This month’s show features Brendon Walsh from the Conan O’Brien and Jimmy Kimmel Live shows, as well as featured performers from such shows as Reno 911 and The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson. DJ R-Rated will be on hand to put everyone in a good mood for this comedy, music, food and beer mash-up. This month’s food truck will feature Mediterranean fare from Pitapusher. Tickets are $10 in advance and $15 at the door. Advance tickets can be purchased at superseriousshow.com.