In the latest episode of Duck Dynasty, we get to know Jase Robertson’s son Reed a little better. We learn he loves tattoos, lives in Nashville and is chasing a music career. In case you want to learn more about the musical Robertson, we found out everything you need to know about his budding career.

https://www.instagram.com/p/temgvKg1OB/

1. He is multi-talented

Reed isn’t interested in trading on his family name without having any talent to back it up. He not only plays multiple instruments, including guitar and banjo, but he also helps write his songs.

2. He’s dedicated

In order to make sure that his music career takes off, Reed left the comfort of his hometown (and all the luxury that comes with his family home) to try to make it in Nashville. It’s easy to respect someone who is willing to sacrifice for their dream.

More: 6 reasons Duck Dynasty should go back to basics

3. He’s ready to tour

Although his dad might disagree, Reed made an “investment” in his future by purchasing a VW Bug van that he can use to tour around the country. One of the great benefits, he pointed out, is the bed in the van where he can sleep “for free in a Walmart parking lot.” Sounds solid to me.

https://www.instagram.com/p/31w23Fg1FK/

4. He sings with a message

It may not come as a surprise that Reed is focused on singing songs with a message. The Robertson family is famous for their deep Christian beliefs, and even though he classifies his music as country, you can hear the church inspiration in his lyrics.

More: Duck Dynasty premiere shows off some serious parenting fails

5. He’s already got an EP out

You can find his first EP, Catching Light, on iTunes right now.

6. He’s young

Reed is only 20 years old, so he’s got a long future ahead of him to reach his music career goals. Especially when you consider how many encouraging family members he’s got behind him.

7. He’s got his family support

Reed can be regularly seen onstage singing with his dad, Jase. The two sing “Amazing Grace” regularly, but cover all kinds of classics.

More: Duck Dynasty‘s Jase Robertson kicked out of Trump Hotel for looking homeless

It’s too soon to say whether Reed is the next big country star, but we’ll be keeping an eye out for his progress now that every Duck Dynasty fan knows his name.