HMS Montrose at Canakkale (Chanak), Turkey - troops in transit - 30th September 1922. The Chanak Crisis, also called Chanak Affair in September 1922 was the threatened attack by Turkish troops on British and French troops stationed near Canakkale to guard the Dardanelles neutral zone. The handling of the crisis by the British cabinet was a major contributor to the downfall of British Prime Minister David Lloyd George. Two days before this photograph was taken, on 28th September, Mustafa Kemal told the British he had ordered his troops to avoid any incident at Chanak and agreed to a peace negot

Captions are provided by our contributors.

RMID:Image ID :2JD6JMK

Image details

Contributor :

Chroma Collection / Alamy Stock Photo

Image ID :

2JD6JMK

File size :

52.1 MB (1.7 MB Compressed download)

Open your image file to the full size using image processing software.

Releases :

Model - no | Property - noDo I need a release?

Dimensions :

3375 x 5398 px | 28.6 x 45.7 cm | 11.3 x 18 inches | 300dpi

More information :

This image could have imperfections as it’s either historical or reportage.

HMS Montrose at Canakkale (Chanak), Turkey - troops in transit - 30th September 1922. The Chanak Crisis, also called Chanak Affair in September 1922 was the threatened attack by Turkish troops on British and French troops stationed near Canakkale to guard the Dardanelles neutral zone. The handling of the crisis by the British cabinet was a major contributor to the downfall of British Prime Minister David Lloyd George. Two days before this photograph was taken, on 28th September, Mustafa Kemal told the British he had ordered his troops to avoid any incident at Chanak and agreed to a peace negotiations. Colourised version of: 10652107 Date: 1922

Sorry this image isn’t available for license in your territory, please contact us for more information.

Available for editorial use only. Get in touch for any commercial

Commercial use includes advertising, marketing, promotion, packaging, advertorials, and consumer or merchandising products.

or personal uses

Personal prints, cards and gifts, or reference for artists. Non-commercial use only, not for resale.

.