This was Canada’s first step against Britain and as well as a significant step towards its independence. The Chanak Crisis was as a defining moment in Canadian history, because it showed that Canada could no longer be counted on to follow the British lead. Chanak affair was Prime Minister Mackenzie King’s first major foreign policy test. After the Chanak Crisis the other steps like Halibut Treaty, King-Byng Crisis and Balfour Report was stairs of Canada’s independence. The Chanak Crisis was a first step of Canada’s independence’s stair.

In World War I, it wasn’t Canada’s its own decision to join the war, but Canada played significant role in many battles. Vimy is considered as Canadian milestone. The Vimy Ridge is one of the greatest battles in Canadian history. The battle of Vimy Ridge was began on April 9, 1917. Vimy ridge was a vantage point that provided a clear view of surrounding countryside, supply routes, and empty positions. The French army had attacked Vimy Ridge three times and suffered many casualties. They won the portion of Ridge, but six months later Germany retook it from the British troops. Canada used new approach to defeat French troops and win the Vimy again. And the result was a stunning victory that gained more ground, more prisoners, and more captured artillery than ever.

The battle of Vimy Ridge was a defining moment in Canadian history, because it was the first time Canada established its self as a true nation. The British allies had been trying to capture Vimy Ridge for three years, but were having no success. Ultimately the Canadians did it in three days. This showed other nations around the world that Canada had a strong military with intelligent combat techniques. But, how about the casualties that had suffered in this battle? The cost of this victory was very high. About 10 600 Canadians were killed or wounded. The memorial of Vimy Ridge was built in remembrance of Canadian soldiers. Another reason why this battle is one of the most significant battles in Canadian history is alliance group of Canadian division. For the first time in the Great War, all four Canadian divisions fought together for bravery and courage on the battlefield. And Canada’s this courage and bravery brought about a fantastic victory, not only for the Canadian forces but also for all the allied cause. This was a significant step in the growth of Canadian pride and nationalism. Canada’s this victory also gave independence to most of the Canadians and most of all Canadian troops. That’s why the Vimy Ridge is known as a defining moment for the Canada.

In World War I the Britain declared the war on Canada’s behalf. But, for World War II, it was in Canada’s hand to decide whether or not it will join the war, because Canada was an independent country now. Many Canadian were reluctant to be drawn into these world events again. So, Canada’s Parliament decided to call a special session to debate on this issue. But, Prime Minister King and House of Commons decided to support Britain and to go to the war. As a result, King gave a powerful speech in favor of declaring war. And finally, the official opposition, conservatives and so the people accepted King’s this decision. On September 10, 1939, Canada declared war on Germany and supported Britain.

Canada's this step of its involvement in World War II was a mark of its autonomy and the steps that it had taken towards becoming involved in world affairs. Canada’s this step was really a significant role of Canada among the world. Just after 25 years of the Great War by deciding to join the again, Canada showed the world that what important contribution it could make to the world. The death of the Canadian soldiers of World War I wasn’t even forgotten by the Canadians and again another decision of going to war! Another decision of the Great battles! Again that death! But still Canada decided to go to war and help the Britain to defeat Germany. This was really a significant moment of Canada to join this global conflict. Canada also played the significant role in all the battles of World War II. Many soldiers died for their Country and more was ready to scarify their lives. After all, by taking the decision of joining this global conflict Canada defined it self among the world.

The flag is a symbol, which identifies the people belonging to a group. In 1964, Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson advised the House of Commons that the government wanted a distinctive national flag adopted by the time of the 1967 centennial celebrations. A joint Senate and House of Commons Committee call for submissions for the design of a new Canadian flag. More than 2000 designs were submitted for new Canadian flag. Finally, the three design were chosen for Canada –First, the Red Ensign combined with a fleur-de-lis and Union Jack; second, the three red maple leaves on a single stem with a white background and blue borders; and third the single maple leaf flag white square with two red bars. The Prime Minister and committee preferred the three-maple-leaf design, but the debate continued. The colors decided upon were red and white, having been proclaimed Canada's national colors in 1921. The red flag with a single maple leaf in a white square was the flag chosen. On December 15, 1964, the House of Commons passed a bill appointing the current flag. The Senate passed the bill two days later, and the official declaration of the new Canadian flag by Queen Elizabeth II, occurred on February 15, 1965.

The formation of the maple leaf in the new Canadian flag in 1965 was official identification for the Canadian Forces, other emblems, and it's contribution to the Canadian economy and culture. The creation of the new Canadian flag was a defining moment in Canadian history because it exhibited Canada as its own nation. It no longer had the union jack of Great Britain on it, which represented Canada's early years as a colony of Britain or a depended country. So, this maple leaf flag also exhibited Canada as an independent country. During the election of 1963, Lester B Pearson promised Canadians a flag of their own and they acquired the Canada’s new flag.

So, the defining moment in Canadian history is some event or some decisions, which shaped and helped Canada to form as a country. For Canada, these defining moments have characterized Canada from a dependent British colony to an autonomous country. Some of the event had also showed that how important contribution Canada could make to the world. In addition, these defining moments have further pushed Canada towards nationhood, which included mentioned above have guided Canada into doing just that. Canada also has been through many battles, very hard chosen decisions, and gone through many changes that have changed the way Canadians live today. Surely without these defining moments, the life of Canadians would certainly have been very different.