Paris Peace Conference started

The Paris peace conference started on January 18th of 1919 in Versailles just out side of paris. 25 nations participated, there were representitive from the United Kingdom (David Lloyd George), United Stated (Woodrow Wilson), France (Georges Clemenceau), and Italy (Vittorio Emanuele Orlando)

"The BIg Four"

The United States, France, United Kingdom and Italy became known as the Big four, they dominated the proceedings that led to the formulation of the treaty of Versallies, a treaty that ended World War One. The big four (left to right)

David Lloyd George- Prime Minister of Great Britain

Vittorio Emanuele Orlando- Prime Minister of Italy

Georges Clemenceau- Prime Minister of France

Woodrow Wilson- 28th Presedent of the United States

Robert Borden

Prime Minister of Canada Robert Borden fought successfully for Canada to have it's own seat at the conference and succeded, Canada was no longer a representitive of Britain. Robert Borden insisted he be included among the other leaders to sign the treaty of Versailles.

The Chanak Crisis 1922

The Chanak Crisis also known as The Chanak Affair and The Chanak Incident was a war scare in 1922 between Britain and The Republic of Turkey. It was repotedly told by the Turkish people that they were trying to get the Greek people out of Turkey and get it back to the way that it was.

Chanak Crisis

Chanak, Turkey 1922. Brirain was commited to maintaining troops in Chanak Turkey to protect the straight linking the Mediteranian sea to the Black sea. When the Turkish people threatend the British troops,Britain sent out a call to the Dominions for assiatance.

Mackenzie King

Canadian Prime Minister Mackenzie King sent a cable to Westminster saying that he would have to consult parlement before sending troops. This was a indication that Canada was no longer automatically at war on Britains demand. The Crisis Passed before there was any further involvment The Chanak incident is important as it is an example of Canada's indipendence from England

Canada fought

Although Canada's right to negotiate commercial treaties was well established, The British wanted to sign the convention along with Canada, Like they always have. Prime Minister Mackenzie King argued that the matter was only a concern between Canada and the United States, and he threatened separate canadian representation in Washington D.C.

The Halibut Treaty was signed

The Halibut Treaty was signed on March 2nd 1923, It was a Canadian-American agreement concerning fishing rights. It was the first treaty independently negotiated and signed by the Canadian government.

King Byng

Feild Marshal Julian Hedworth George Byng, 1st Viscout Byng of Vimy was a British Army offiver who served as a the 12th govener of Canada since the Canadian Constitution. Julian Hedworth George Byng (King Byng)

September 11, 1862 - June 6, 1935

The Balfour Report

In 1926 the Balfour Report declared that Britain and its Dominions were equal to each other. It was a landmark document confirming Canada as a fully independent country. Untited with Britain and the other Dominions through commonwealth. July 1st, 1867 the Dominion of Canada was established, It comorised a union of the British North American colonies of, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and the provence of Canada (now known as Ontario and Quebec).

The end of the Crisis

When the Liberal leader and the Prime minister of the previous parlement declined to turn over power to the conservitives but instead met with the house of commons, the new house, mainly due to the support of the progressives, backed the minority liberal government, there support lasted until June 25th 1926. Parlement defeted a motion to remove censure from a non-confidential motion against the King government