Irving H. Feller, MD, age 97, passed away on August 13, 2022 with his beloved wife Cynthia by his side. Both were encircled by loving family and friends. Irving was born in New York on June 2, 1925. He attended Peter Stuyvesant High School and City College of New York before enlisting in the US Army in WWII. He served with distinction in both the European and Pacific Theaters.

After an honorable discharge Irving returned to his education graduating from the University of Michigan Medical School in 1955. He continued on at U of M to complete his internship and residency in General Surgery. He went on to do pioneering work on Burn Medicine in clinical, research, and educational capacities. He was a founder of the University of Michigan Burn Center, the National Institute of Burn Medicine, the National Burn Information Exchange, and the American Burn Association. As a clinical Professor of Surgery at the University of Michigan Medical School, he taught students and mentored interns, residents, and fellows. He published over 128 books and papers during his tenure. Irving retired in 1990, a full Professor of Surgery and was awarded Professor Emeritus.

Irving or “Doc,” as he was affectionally known, was a true Renaissance man. An avid reader, farmer, explorer, inventor, contractor, developer, and entrepreneur, his curiosity and sense of adventure provided fertile ground for a long and productive life. For over 46 years with his wife, friend, and soulmate Cynthia by his side, he felt he could do anything. And he did. They were together having adventures and fun right up to his death.

He is survived by his wife Cynthia (Wojtowicz) Feller, daughters Leslie Atler (Edward), Susan Feller, and son David Feller (Denise); grandchildren Todd Atler (Gia), Tim Atler (Denise), Liz Wagner (Mike) and Caroline Feller-Howard; great-grandchildren Aiden and Lucia Chanez Atler, Asha and Ronan Atler Super and Talia Wagner. He was preceded in death by his parents Max and Celia Feller, sister Roslyn and brother Lester. He was dearly loved by countless other family and friends.

In lieu of flowers please send memorial tributes to the charitable institution of your choice.

Arrangements by Staffan-Mitchell Funeral Home.