The healing power of nature

So finally after a few days of the gloom, the light returned again. Mind you not that it really mattered, on Saturday morning E and I went for an early morning run along the foggy lanes of St Martins and St Andrews, it was rather special as it was so quite, no planes and not many cars, almost as if everyone had decided to stay tucked up inside away, taking refuge from the gloomy weather outside.

In the afternoon I jet washed the back patio - it is rock and roll around here I tell you! It did remind me however, how our light is always there. The patio was layered with grime and yet after a few bursts on the jet wash, its original colour peeked through - it reminded me of us. How the grime, be that physical, mental or emotional, clouds are our own light, yet it is always there, we just have to chip away at it, bit by bit, to uncover our true self, the radiant, shining being we are.

I was reminded of the weather too. On Sunday the light appeared again, glorious sunshine to make us feel more alive and joyous somehow. E and I felt so inspired that we went for a quick dip in the sea at Petit Bot. Of course it was glorious - high tide and no one else to be seen, but it was of course very cold and while I had all good intentions of taking a proper swim, my body went into shock and I lasted all of about 2 minutes!! Every respect for those of you who swim properly all year around!

Thereafter, I managed to attend Sheila's yoga class, a wonderful start to Sunday, especially with the sun shining outside and the sounds of the morning chatter of birds. Thank you Sheila, Om Shanti. It certainly woke me up and back at home, E and I went out for a bike ride to make the most of the warm sunshine, through the lanes near Petit Bot and through the valley by the little chapel - I do love those lanes with all the wonderful serene Guernsey cows. We even saw a sparrow hawk - well we think so, too big to be a buzzard, too small to be a kestrel, grey too, we are spoilt here on Guernsey.

In the afternoon We collected some horse manure with my parents (see it really is rock and roll) and I helped Mum to rake the new raised beds that my Dad has lovely built. Some of our seeds have germinated and we transferred the seedlings to bigger pots, lots of Brussels sprouts and purple sprouting, it is rather exciting being involved from the infancy stage. Mind you I have a lot to learn - it appears that I planted the butternut squash seeds upside down and while the poor little things were trying to germinate, they were all topsy turvy so thankfully Mum turned them all around - what an idiot I am huh!!!

Growing does help one to remember the simplicity to life - the need for light, heat, shelter and water. I find it ever so relaxing to spend time in the greenhouse. My Mum talks to the plants and plays background music from the radio as it helps them to grow. We are getting more bees, this time in the greenhouse, the bee man told me that they like music too, let us hope they like Island Fm!!

Mum and Dad are now established wwoofers - world wide opportunities on organic farms (www.wwoof.org) - and are receiving interest from wwoofers wanting to come and stay and help us during the summer. I was initially introduced to this scheme in Australia, not only meeting travellers who had done some wwoofing, but also a friend on my Yoga course in Byron who is an established wwoofer and has people to stay to help with their coffee plants in the Byron hills.

And then a few summer ago, after taking 3 months out to travel around the world again, I stayed with my cousin and her husband in a mobile home on their organic small holding in rural North Devon, near to Bideford. I was there for some "time out" to figure out what to do next and while I spent much of my time writing and studying a holistic therapy course, I did put in some time attending to their vegetable garden. This was my first exposure to vegetable growing and it planted a seed, that has grown ever since. So a huge thank you to Yo, for the opportunity, and for helping me to realise the therapeutic benefits of spending so much time in nature and the present moment and meditative qualities of weeding!

There is a lot to be said about spending time in nature. It really does help to slow us down and re-connect us with the resonance of the earth somehow. We lead such busy and often stressful lives these days, everything happens so quickly that is refreshing to slow down and literally smell the roses. Not only that but it is healing. It rejuvenates the soul and reminds us of the bigger picture, the natural flow, the coming and going, a time to stop and a time to grow.

It works on our root chakra, connecting us to the earth. If ever we feel ungrounded, disconncetd somehow, then it can help to stand barefoot on the earth, maybe hold a tree (I jest not, I did this every morning of my Yoga teacher training course and I truly believe it helped me to stay grounded), or sink the feet into soft sand, and just breathe the fresh air and listen to the sounds of the birds or the sound of the sea. It opens the heart chakra too and energises the crown chakra, reminding us of our connection to something greater, that we are part of the whole, not so alone after all. I guarantee you will feel better afterwards!

So on that note, time to stop and be quiet for a while!

Om shanti!

The sound of silence!

It has all gone a bit foggy out there these last few days and while on the one hand it feels damp and claustrophobic what with not being able to see the bigger picture, on the other hand it is so nice not hearing aeroplanes flying overhead!!

There is something so incredibly wonderful about silence. Life has been busy recently, with constant chatter and people in the house and today I am enjoying the opportunity to potter between sessions and just enjoy my own quiet tidy space! Of course it is not really that quiet, the back door is open and I can hear the birds in the garden and here beside me the cat licking herself (but she should settle soon!) and then the fog horn, reminding me that it is so rare to experience total silence.

I came across this wonderful quote yesterday, which reminded me of the importance of sometimes sitting with others in silence, "Silence is just another way of communicating feelings, a space for words and thoughts to gather.” So true! In Yoga we call this "Mouna", literally silence derived from the Sanskrit root "mun", which means to measure.

It is said that silence is God, the living force, the only reality, the soul, peace, strength, goal, aim and purpose of our existence. It is not only about not talking, but also about having more control over the expression of the senses. Mouna is a way to measure and observe the input and output of the senses as a way to obtain inner silence - essentially to achieve mouna of the mind.

It is said that through silence the brain and nerves are soothed and meditation becomes easier. Silence helps to develop will power, strengthens resolves, gives peace of mind, makes it easier to speak the truth and gives control over the speech. Furthermore it is understood to help to control anger, irritability and the emotions and is useful for physical and mental healing encouraging serenity, calmness and inner spiritual strength.

It is recommended that we should spend one week a year in complete solitude, staying in one place, not interacting with anybody and living a simple life. However while many live like this in monasteries their whole lives, it is slightly more challenging for the rest of us and for some almost impossible, not least in timings but simply because it can be incredibly confronting being faced with the concept of a life lived in silence!

I have attended a couple of Yoga retreats where mouna has been an integral part of the timetable. In Bali on a retreat with Emil Wendel, we were asked to be silent from the moment of rising until brunch, after the first asana and pranayama session each day. Then on a retreat in Goa with Emil and Sue Pendlebury, we were asked to remain in silence each morning as we had done in Bali, but also we experienced two full days and nights of silence too.

I actually have no problem being silent as I like to be quiet, but there were people on the retreat, especially the Goa one, who were really challenged by the idea of silence, not being able to ignore or drown out the sound of their own inner voice, nor communicate with others verbally. Of course I loved it. When I was doing my Yoga therapy training in Vancouver last February, I spent 3 weeks living on my own and on the days when we didn't have class, the only words I would speak would be to thank people for serving me in the shop or at the Yoga studio, but other than that, I had no need to speak! I find it incredibly liberating and I start to get flustered if I haven't experienced enough silence in a week!!

I will always remember a poster I saw on the wall of an Ayurvedic clinic where I was staying in Kathamndu, that said "silence is healing". I believe it is so true. It was certainly apartof their treatment in that clinic, so that whilst there was times when music was played as this can also be healing, especially mantras and sound vibration, many of the treatments were conducted in silence, which can be so soothing for the nerves.

There was this restorative Yoga class I attended in Vanocuver last year during the time that my life was very quiet and the teacher played singing bowl music very loudly, and while I do appreciate the healing properties, it was so loud that my body became really tense as it was literally hurting my ear drums. It actually made me chuckle because it couldn't have been any less restorative, and I left feeling far more on edge than when I arrived!! I suppose it is all about balance.

Anyhow today is a lovely quiet day and long may it continue!

As for the fog, I guess we should enjoy the peace while it is there, because no doubt there will be a lot of catch up flying over the next few days!

x

New moon tidings!

It is a new moon today, which may account for the sleeplessness I have heard people mention the last few nights, me too actually, too much crazy energy in the air!!

Mind you it has been beautiful out there these last few days, the sun has been bright and the daffodils are starting to come through enlightening the scene with their bright yellow glow. Spring is on the way, it is so exciting!!

I have been running quite a bit recently. Not far, about 30-40 minutes at a time, and I do question how on earth I managed to run the London Marathon all those years ago, phew! These days it is more for the delight of it, well it gives me the opportunity to process and get some peace and quiet, no talking, just me and nature, the sounds of the birds and the glorious views through the rural lanes of St Andrews.

If I am lucky I am rarely passed by any traffic through the lanes and aside from the odd dog walker, I rarely see another sole either. I see cows in their fields, daffodils, primroses and celandine. Last week a buzzard flew a similar route to the one I was running so I got witness the elegant beauty of its flight. I see sheep and their baby lambs behind St Andrews' church (so cute), and in the distance I can see the sea and Fort Houmet at Vazon. It truly is a joy.

No doubt the novelty will wear off soon as it has done in the past and I will no longer need to process as I am at the moment. Still it does make you feel so much clearer and energised, a little like a good Vinyasa Yoga class!! The fresh air makes all the difference too, especially as I have been stuck inside decorating quite a bit recently. Not that I mind. The paint fumes are not ideal, but I do love the art of decorating, trying to keep the brush straight and the fact you can transform a space so quickly.

So it has been a little busy. On Sunday I went on a Yoga therapy course here in Guernsey taught by a lady from the UK. This one was on Yoga for obesity, which was rather interesting, scary though when you consider how many people are now classed as obese, surely a reflection of our sedentary lifestyle and all those hormones flying around in our food and water, to say nothing of the stress and pressure we live under these days. Let us hope we will find our find our balance again as a society and work with nature rather than against it, like Ayurveda, got to love that Indian system of healing.

Talking of nature, I helped Mum to dig some beds in the greenhouse yesterday so we can get the greenhouse tidy for the season ahead. It is all rather exciting. Dad is making some raised beds for us outside of the greenhouse at the moment, which will make weed control and picking so much easier this year. We planted some potatoes and I was delighted to see that some of the seeds we sowed a few weeks ago are starting to sprout a little. So much fun!

After the run and greenhouse experience I stopped at Vazon on the way home to sit and listen to the waves and breathe some of the sea air and as the tide was high and the sun was still shining, albeit headed for sunset, I decided to go for a quick swim. I have been a complete slacker on the winter swimming this year, I think I managed twice in January and none until that point in February.

And to be honest I doubt I will be rushing to repeat the February experience. My gosh. It was freezing. I lasted a grand total of 15 seconds of breaststroke before I had to get out. My feet were freezing and I was cold for an hour afterwards. I have no idea how the hardcore sea swimmers do it a few times a week for a good ten to fifteen minutes, every respect!!

Apparently temperatures are going to improve the next few days, not in the sea however! But still, maybe this really is a sign that Spring is on its way...I hope so, the world will seem a much brighter place!

On that note, time to go and practice, that always makes the world seem a much brighter place!

xx

Happy day of love

So it is Valentine's Day today, the day of love! So yes OK, it has now become a horribly commercialised affair these days, a huge business in itself what with all the heart shaped merchandise and flowers and chocolate galour, BUT, it is an opportunity for us all to open our hearts and come together in a collective consciousness of love. So that is pretty cool.

As I said in my previous blog entry, maybe all this potential vibration of love will help to raise the vibration of our beautiful world, help the planet to heal a little. Well at least it may help to bring a smile to our face when we receive a card from someone we love, secret or not.

So how did the day get its name? Well apparently it comes from a famous Saint although there are various stories about who he was. The most popular belief is that St Valentine was a priest from Rome in the 3rd century AD.

Evidently Emperor Claudius II had banned marriage because he thought married men were bad soldiers. Valentine thought this was unfair, so he broke the rules and arranged marriages in secret.

When Claudius found out, Valentine was sentenced to death and thrown in jail. There, he fell in love with the jailer's blind daughter. His love and belief in God cured her blindness, and when he was taken to be killed on 14 February he sent her a love letter signed "From your Valentine".

Valentine's Day didn't become popular in the UK until the 17th century. By the 18th century it was traditional for people to swap handwritten messages of affection. Nowadays we also swap chocolates and flowers and all things heart-shaped!!!

I figure today is a good day to share some Sufi poetry with you - this is my favourite poetry and while I shouldn't need an excuse, it is appropriate as it is all about love...

Trading in Love's Currency

Reason said, "We live in a world

of six directions - and that's it!"

Love replied, "There is a path beyond,

and I have travelled it many times."

reason saw a market and set up shop,

but love trades in another currency altogether.

Rumi

Sweep out the stable

Be watchful - the grace of God appears suddenly.

It comes without warning to an open heart.

Sweep out the stable of your existence

and the king will gladly enter.

Rumi

The Missing Sun

You are like the sun -

Come!

Without your face, the garden is yellow and pale -

Come!

Without you, the world is like dust -

Come!

Without you, the circle of love turns cold.

Come!

Rumi

The Glowing of Your Presence

Where have you taken your sweet song?

Come back and play me a tune.

I never really cared for things in this world.

It was the glow of your presence

that filled it with beauty

Hafiz

On that note have a wonderful day, open the heart and spread the love!!

Love xx

So the Yoga backlash continues, Anusara this time...

Good grief, it has all gone crazy in the Yoga world. I have just received an email news update from the wonderful Bridget Woods-Kramer, an Anusara-inspired teacher in London with whom I have studied previously, which addresses her regret to write in response to the publicity storm relating to John Friend, the founder of Anusara Yoga.

It would seem that his actions represent a failure to adhere to the ethical standards of Anusara yoga and more specifically the root philosophical teachings upon which Anusara is based. As if Yoga needed any more bad press.

I studied a lot of Anusara Yoga while I was in Vancouver this time last year and loved the energy of the classes. Of course what has happened in John's personal life does nothing to detract from the quality of his teachings, nor indeed the Anusara lineage and other Anusara teachers. It is just a shame. The internet is full of stories of his reported actions and like Bridget says,

"It should be remembered that we are nothing if we can’t find forgiveness & compassion in our hearts and gratitude for what we have and for that which we have received. I look forward to a time of healing and change and I reaffirm my commitment to be the best yoga teacher I can be."

The trouble is we do put these people on pedestals. They are internationally acclaimed Yoga teachers with massive followings of students. They have inspired and students look to them for spiritual guidance. And yet they are only human. And often their ego works in as many tricky ways as our own. And often the power gets too much. And sadly they then become a false guru.

I have met many of them on my Yoga journey. Open and keen to learn more and to be guided spiritually, it can often take you a while to recognise them. I have always been very good - or is that every bad - at looking for the best in people and not necessarily taking the time to check into my intuition. I have met teachers who have presented themselves as the most spiritually directed and ethical individuals, the kind of teacher who you may pout on pedestal, only to find that they have abused their "power" and have engaged in inappropriate sexual relationships with their students or have screwed them over financially.

I guess the lesson for all of us is to recognise the pure from the false. To recognise when someone is using their power in a positive life transforming way, or from the ego. It is a lesson - for me again - not to put people on pedestals and not to always think they are better somehow. It is also a lesson to be pure hearted and minded and utilise our power (as everyone has the ability to be powerful) in a loving way that benefits the whole of humanity.

Thankfully it is Valentine's day tomorrow and I am hoping that despite the commercialism of the day, we can all tap into the universal consciousness of love (as happens when we are all swimming on the same wavelength so bring on those feelings of love from the heart) and raise the vibration of the world (and especially the Yoga world) a little bit.

Time to go dancing around the fairy ring, bring on some more positive changes!

With love.

xx