By Karen Huggins, Miami Swim Week, the biggest swimwear spectacle on the planet returned post-pandemic and saw hundreds of brands, veterans, and newcomers. The swim-centric event featured the latest trends and fashions from brands and designers including Oh Polly, Luli Fama, Maaji, Boohoo, Jonathan Simkhai, Honey Birdette, Megan Mar, Liliana Montoya, Forever 21, Pretty Little Thing, Mery Playa among others. Cocktail hours, brunches, dinners and afterparties are essential at the four-day swimwear event. All of them with amazing brands and opportunities to experience the new collections. This year I covered the events with two local Miami babes and influencers: Vanessa @vanessarosetilley and Juanita @jlondonostyle. We started the week with beautiful models descending upon Miami Beach for the Select Models-hosted party for Paraiso swim show at Meet Dalia. After an amazing night we were ready for the first day of shows and events. Jonathan Simkhai held a presentation at Joia Beach, the perfect scenario for featuring his stunning Resort 2022 Swim Collection. Sophisticated and elegant designs for the chic woman. Destination Colombia show brought a colorful explosion of amazing designs and quality fabrics including brands such as Ancora, Bahama Mama, Mar de Lua, Mola Mola, Naranja Furcado, Palmacea, PQ Swim, and Smeralda. They also hosted a brunch at the Ritz Carlton South Beach where we could meet the designers and learn why this country is one of the leaders in the industry. Paraiso presented the panel series where industry insiders came together to express and exchange ideas. A key panel of experts including Omnisend and Okendo talked about Direct-to-consumer (D2C) and Courvoisier hosted a lavish lunch at Mila Restaurant. The consciously beauty brand, Elaluz hosted a brunch with the founder and influencer Camilla Coelho. The acclaimed businesswoman and instagramer presented a new Elaluz line, the brand presents timeless must-haves featuring powerful Brazilian superfoods with extracts and oils from plants, fruits and nuts. After a fruitful day learning about the industry with the panel and meeting designers, we headed to Byfne Show presented by Models of Color Matter. An explosion of colors, joy and vivid designs. Oh Polly introduced us to their new sister company Neena Swim on a show with sexy models with flawless bodies. A neutral color palate including nudes and whites in daring cuts. Gorgeous! @glamandbrains at Miami Swim Week @elaluz event @jlondonostyle with Camila Coelho at @elaluz event @elaluz brunch@jlondonostyle at Oh Polly Yacht party@vanessarosetilley Miami Swim Week 2021 @vanessarosetilley at Miami Swim Week Bfyne @modelsofcolormatter showDESTINATION Colombia Bahama MamaDESTINATION Colombia_Ancora_Oliva PontonJonathan Simkhai show Jonathan Simkhai showMiami Swim Week 2021 @glamandbrainsOh Polly Oh Polly

By Karen Huggins If I had to choose a Fashion Designer that represents my child dreams would be Badgley Mischka. As a kid always dreamed about princess dresses like Cinderella, and Badgley Mischka knows how to make you feel like a princess. I was honored to be invited to attend Badgley Mischka Fall 2020 runway presentation. A dream come true watching the amazing fabrics and beaded appliques in front row. The looks were groundbreaking; glamour inspired by British influences including exaggerated sleeves and belts tightly cinched at the waist. I loved the embellished dresses and bow details that provided a classy bit of romanticism. Congratulations for the amazing collection Mark Badgley and James Mischka. Rebecca Minkoff presentation was a rainbow playground. She presented the spring 2020 collection ready to buy. The concept of this collection was “Women are complex creatures” so models represented kids, teenagers, moms to be and moms; a transition into womanhood. Rebecca promoted a beautiful message about women power with symbols on hoodies and graphic tees. A colorful and happy collection including sustainability as a key point. Follow me on instagram @karenhuggins_blog https://www.instagram.com/karenhuggins_blog/

We at Miami Shoot Magazine wish you and your families great health, happiness and prosperity in 2020! Check out our Miami 2020 calendar of events that you may want to consider attending throughout the year. Yr. 2020 JAN 01-05 ROALD DAHL’S CHARLEY and the CHOCOLATE FACTORY at Adrienne Arsht Center JAN 02 MIAMI HEAT VS. TORONTO RAPTORS at the American Airlines Arena JAN 30- BUD LIGHT SUPER BOWL MUSIC FEST at the American Airlines Arena FEB 01 JAN-DEC ON GOING EXHIBITS at Pérez Art Museum Miami FEB 02 SUPER BOWL LIV at the Hard Rock Stadium FEB 14-18 MIAMI INTERNATIONAL BOAT SHOW at the Miami Marine Stadium FEB 20-24 SOUTH BEACH WINE and FOOD FESTIVAL in Miami Beach MAR 18-31 MIAMI OPEN in Key Biscayne MAR 27 JULIO IGLESIAS JR TIMELESS at the Flamingo Theatre Bar in Brickell MAR 29- APRIL 01 ULTRA MUSIC FESTIVAL location TBA MAY 25-26 MEMORIAL DAY AIR and SEA SHOW in Miami Beach MAY 30 ELTON JOHN at the American Airlines Arena JUNE 21 SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS VS. MIAMI MARLINS at Marlins Park JULY 11-16 MIAMI SWIM WEEK in Miami Beach AUG 01-30 MIAMI SPICE (Various participating restaurants across Miami) AUG 17 COCONUT GROVE FOOD & WINE FESTIVAL in Coconut Grove’s Regatta Park AUG 30- SEP 02 HOME DESIGN & REMODELING SHOW at Mana Wynwood Convention Center SEP 27-29 WYNWOOD’S OCTOBERFEST Presented by Samuel Adams in Wynwood OCT 19-20 SOUTH FLORIDA SEAFOOD FESTIVAL at Miami Marine Stadium OCT 31 HALLOWEEN ON THE MILE in Coral Gables NOV 01-10 MIAMI INTERNATIONAL AUTO SHOW at Miami Beach Convention Center NOV 23 VIZCAYA BALL at Vizcaya Museum & Gardens DEC 04-08 ART BASEL, DESIGN MIAMI at Miami Beach Convention Center DEC 02-06 RED DOT ART FAIR, SPECTRUM at Mana Wynwood Convention Center *All information deemed accurate with no guarantees. Subject to change without notice.

By Karen Huggins Fashion 4 Good is a network of women using the power of social media to bring positive change to the world. Their mission is to improve the situation of suffering children through charity fashion related events and influencers. The group of influencers reach more than 10 million followers on Instagram and they use this force to spread good through fashion. Every year Fashion 4 Good selects a different country to support. Last year they raised more than $100,000 to build a school in India. This year they are focused on the situation in Venezuela. They have partnered with four local Venezuelan organizations dedicated to supporting the needs of underprivileged children (Hogar Bambi, Fe y Alegria, Fundana and Hospital Ortopedico Infantil.). The second edition of THE BAZAAR FOR GOOD, a lifestyle driven charity event filled with curated panel talks, will take place on November 21st at Miami Design District (Paradise Plaza 151 Northeast 41st Street #3547) from 11am to 7pm. More than 100 brands from all over the world donated their products for this special day to raise funds for the children of Venezuela. You can join this beautiful cause and buy the Holiday gifts supporting Venezuelan children. You can find brands such as: Alice & Olivia, Frankie, Style Mafia, Solid & Stripe, PiTUSA, Iorane, Sinesia Karol, Boho Hunter, Bossa Concept among others. Click HERE for tickets More information www.fashion4good.org Instagram: @TheBazaarForGood Karen Huggins MSMOnline Fashion Contributor Instagram: @KarenHuggins_blog

Monica Hansen Beachwear was the first brand to officially kick off the runways at the Paraiso Fashion Fair at Collins Park. This was Monica Hansen’s runway debut as a designer, sponsored by Dr. Garth Fisher Beauty DocBlock Sunscreen. Additional sponsors included Icelandic Glacial Water, ShoeDazzle, and Absurda Eyewear. “I was so honored to have shared my 2019 collection during Swim Week for the first time. The inspiration for this collection comes from the 80s and 90s – it’s a very sporty collection but also elegant. I’m so excited to see where the brand goes further from here,” Hansen said. It was not just Monica Hansen’s designs and gorgeous models that made waves. The former Miss Norway who graced countless magazine covers as a model before she ascended to the Designer Olymp stunned the audience when she appeared on stage wearing one of her own bikini designs flaunting a perfect supermodel figure and simply looking flawless.

Day 3 – Master Class Programming, Runway Shows and Antonio Banderas Benefit Gala Photo Credit: Lukebeyond Day three of Miami Fashion Week (MIAFW) continued with the educational series of Miami Fashion Week Summit hosted by internationally recognized model Valeria Mazza. Opening the floor was Dr. Carmen Hijosa, founder and CEO of Piñatex, who spoke on sustainable materials, followed by Juan Pedro Moreno, president of Accenture, commenting on the impact of digital, and concluded with Francois Van Den Abeele, founder of Sea2see, explaining on sea waste disrupting fashion. Back at the Ice Palace Film Studios, over 600 guests were in attendance leaving standing-room only for the runway presentations by Benito Santos and Ágatha Ruiz de la Prada. Renowned Mexican fashion designer, Benito Santos, opened the night with looks inspired by Greek mythology. Ready-to-wear resort wear with gold accents and gladiator sandals, the exclusive collection reflected ancient beauty. Noble Spanish designer Ágatha Ruiz de la Prada followed with her models bouncing with energy, blowing kisses and getting cheeky on the runway. With the brand’s signature fun-loving style, the exclusive resort collection unleashed a rainbow-spanning palette that was smacked with stripes, hearts and patterns. The evening concluded with MIAFW Honorary President Antonio Banderas Benefit Gala, with all proceeds supporting Nicklaus Children’s Hospital Foundation and Fundación Lágrimas y Favores. The annual black-tie event featured sit-down dinner, live entertainment and live auction. For the first time in its history, Roberto Cavalli unveiled a special curated luxury collection at the gala to an audience of A-list celebrities, global influencers and fashion leaders. The collection embodied a modern design of beauty and sensuality with a fresh perspective on glamour. Featuring 25 looks from the brand’s collection, the Roberto Cavalli team donated an evening gown of the SS 2005 Roberto Cavalli Collection to the live auction. VIPS in attendance included: · Antonio Banderas (MIAFW Honorary President) · Julio Iranzo (MIAFW CEO) · Carlos A. Giménez (Mayor of Miami-Dade County) · Valeria Mazza (Fashion Model and Entrepreneur) · Nieves Álvarez (Spanish Model and Television Presenter) · Ágatha Ruiz de la Prada (Fashion Designer) · Ángel Sánchez (Fashion Designer) · Rene Ruiz (Fashion Designer) · Ugo Colombo (Real Estate Developer) Looking forward, day four will include exclusive runway shows by Colombia’s acclaimed designers Daniella Batlle, Carolina Estefan and Lina Cantillo, as well renowned Spanish designer Custo Barcelona.

For our guide on the 15th Annual South Beach Wine & Food Festival, please click here Beauty & the Bestie When: Thursday, Feb. 25th at 6:00-9:00pm Where: The Spa at the Viceroy Admission: $60 per person; Those who work on Brickell Ave receive 10% off; For reservations, call (305)503-0369 Additional Information: Includes skin consultations, healthy snacks, access to spa facilities, special discounts, & spa treatment giveaways www.viceroyhotelsandresorts.com Florida Panthers vs Arizona Coyotes When: Thursday, Feb. 25th at 7:30pm Where: BB&T Center Admission: www.ticketmaster.com Fall Out Boy Concert When: Friday, Feb. 26th at 7:00pm Where: Hard Rock Hollywood Casino Admission: www.ticketmaster.com Fashion Night on Brickell When: Friday, Feb. 26th at 7:30pm Where: Espiritu Santo Building Admission: $65 per person at the door Additional Information: Showcasing pieces from top designers; Music, cocktails, & hors d’oeuvres will be served; Benefitting Dade Legal Aid www.fashionnightonbrickell.com Jeff Dunham When: Saturday, Feb. 27th at 5:00pm Where: BB&T Center Admission: www.ticketmaster.com The Beach Boys When: Saturday, Feb. 27th at 8:00pm Where: Hard Rock Hollywood Casino Admission: www.ticketmaster.com Josh Groban Concert When: Saturday, Feb. 27th at 8:00pm Where: Au-Rene Theater at the Broward Center Admission: www.ticketmaster.com A Deliciously Decadent Afternoon of Chocolate & Cocktails When: Sunday, Feb. 28th at 2:00-5:00pm Where: Drinkhouse Fire & Ice Admission: General- $40; VIP- $55 Additional Information: Hosted by James-Beard award winner pastry chef, author, & TV personality Johnny Iuzzini; 3-hour walk around tasting www.chocolateandcocktails.com

By Gisel Habibnejad Last week, the Miami Design District celebrated the opening of the latest flagship store to make MDD their home, Ulysse Nardin. The opening event consisted of a ribbon cutting ceremony followed by a private dinner hosted by baseball superstar Mike Piazza and CEO Patrik Hoffmann. “Miami immediately came to mind as the ideal location for our next Ulysse Nardin Boutique,” says CEO Patrik Hoffmann. “The Design District is recognized internationally as a go-to destination for luxury shopping and creativity. We are excited to be a part of it and look forward to bringing our rich history of craftsmanship and heritage to Miami.” Photography Courtesy of Ulysse Nardin MDD Boutique

By Gisel Habibnejad Photography by World Red Eye Learning about the fashion industry firsthand often involves working hands-on, side-by-side veterans. However, sometimes it’s fun to sit back and watch classic movies as they take you on a virtual tour of fashion throughout the decades. Guests enjoyed this marvelous experience at Fashion Project’s four-day fashion film festival, Wearing Time: Returns, Recalls, Renewals. With films curated by Marketa Uhlirova of Central Saint Martins, University of the Arts London, who is co-founder of Fashion in Film, and Tim Gunning of the University of Chicago’s Department of Film and Media Studies, the collection features pop culture hits, underground films, and rare footage at the hands of the guests. “In film, not only can dress become a vehicle with which to travel through time, is can also measure time, set its rhythm. It allows us to wear time, even as time wears us out,” shared Marketa Uhlirova and Tom Gunning. For more information on Fashion Project, please visit www.fashionprojectbhs.com

By Gisel Habibnejad Photography by World Red Eye Miamians will be happy to know they can now peruse collections by Creatures of the Wind locally. The brand was born in Chicago and created by runners-up of the CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund Shane Gabier and Christopher Peters in 2008. In its first season, it was picked up by Barney’s New York. The brand also appeared in Women’s Wear Daily Top Ten New American Fashion Brands to Watch in 2013. Many who shop the collection can see the collections are driven by “concept and narrative; inspiration is drawn from subcultures, mythological themes, and youth culture.” They also like to think outside the box and invite artists and designers of other disciplines to collaborate. Creatures of the Wind can now be purchased locally at Neiman Marcus Merrick Park & The Webster Bal Harbour For more information, please visit www.creaturesofthewind.com

11th Annual Taste of the Garden When: Thursday, Jan. 28th at 6:30pm Where: Miami Beach Botanical Garden Tickets: $90 per person; Complimentary valet parking Additional Information: Raising environmental awareness & will benefit the Miami Beach Garden Conservatory; Featuring over 20 chefs & restaurants; Guests can enjoy small bites, cocktails, sweets, live entertainment, & partake in a silent auction www.mbgarden.org Sea Movies at PAMM When: Thursday, Jan. 28th at 7:00pm Where: Perez Art Museum Miami Tickets: Free with general museum admission – $16 for adults (does not include food or drink) Additional Information: Monthly series; Finding Nemo will be played this night; Dogs allowed in outdoor areas; Pre-purchase recommended as space is limited www.pamm.org Miggy Ball Gala When: Thursday, Jan. 28th at 7:00pm Where: Adrienne Arsht Center For additional information click here Tiesto When: Friday, Jan. 29th at 11:00pm-5:00am Where: STORY Nightclub Tickets: For VIP table reservations, please call (305)479-4426 or email vip@storymiami.com 4th Annual Miami Beer Festival When: Saturday, Jan. 30th at 6:00pm Where: Marlins Park Tickets: $40 for general admission; $50 for VIP – can arrive at 5:00pm; both tickets prices do not include food or parking Additional Information: Featuring local, national, & international beers; food trucks will be on-site; live DJ spinning www.miamibeerfestival.com 3rd Annual Miami Beach Jazz Festival When: Saturday, Jan. 30th at 7:00pm Where: Olympia Theater Tickets: $45 for general admission; $150 for VIP – includes mezzanine sitting, valet parking, open bar, & gift www.olympiatheater.org Miami Heat vs Atlanta Hawks When: Sunday, Jan. 31st at 6:00pm Where: AmericanAirlines Arena Tickets: www.ticketmaster.com Fashion Project Bal Harbour Shops’ Cultural Space & Fashion in Film Present Wearing Time: Returns, Recalls, Renewals A four-day film festival featuring fashion films curated by Tom Gunning and Marketa Uhlirova. Where: Fashion Project, Bal Harbour Shops, Level 3 Tickets: Screenings & talks are complimentary For more, call (786)245-2200 or email info@fashionprojectbhs.com When: Thursday, Jan. 28th 7:00pm – Fashion is History 8:45pm – Vertigo Friday, Jan. 29th 7:30pm – Om Shanti Om Saturday, Jan. 30th 1:30pm – Tony Takitani 4:30pm – Don’t Look Now 6:45pm – FP Talks/Fashion Time – Film Time 8:15pm – Lola Montes Sunday, Jan. 31st 2:30pm – My Fancy High Heels 4:00pm – Resurrecting & Re-editing the Cinema Divas 5:30pm – Costume Changes: Dolls Clothes & Grey Gardens

By Gisel Habibnejad DELPOZO has done it again this season. The fall winter 2015 line is infused with artistic inspiration drawn from Australian artist Rhys Lee and Russian painter Andrey Remnev. Creative Director of the brand Josep Font, whose ultimate goal was to allude to the pre-Raphaelite spirit with a modern twist, spearheaded the successful interpretation through his artistic eye. Although showcased with a trendy twist, DELPOZO stays true to its signature “architectural tailoring.” The collection is made of pieces perfect for day or evening wear. A detail favorite, geometric shapes by metallic lining, is displayed on a black base of a few pieces. A standout hit at NYFW fall, DELPOZO displayed a true stroke of genius. Spotted Trends: Straight silhouette Shoulder pads Balloon sleeves Peplum shape Felt & velvet fabrics Round toe pumps For more information on DELPOZO’s collection, please visit www.delpozo.com Photography Courtesy of DELPOZO