Welcome to St Joseph & St John the Baptist Catholic Churches

We are a vibrant and welcoming Catholic community in Brighton, with a vision to form disciples of Jesus Christ, to love others,

and to serve our city.

Social Outreach and Community Building - The Fitzherbert Community Hub

We work in partnership with our three local grassroots charities, Voices in Exile, Brighton Table Tennis Club and Real Junk Food Project, to run the Fitzherbert Community Hub and cafe.

Try Alpha?

Alpha is a space where you can ask the questions you’ve always wanted to ask: a course that explores faith, meaning and purpose.

Get Involved

We are a community serving each other and the local area – whether it’s through welcome, making coffee, music, DIY, or families ministry, joining a Team can be a great way to serve God, build friendship, and make a difference.

The Alpha course

A great opportunity to find out more

to explore or deepen faith.

Get in touch and join us

Tuesday evenings - The Promise of the Father

We meet on Tuesday evenings online at 7:30, to grow community, and hear and discuss great input on faith topics.

Wednesday Lectio Divina

Join online at 8pm every Wednesday

Thursday Mornings

Join us online at 10 on Thursday mornings for social time, learning and discussion

Please Support Our Mission

If you are new to our parish and website -

ALPHA – A WONDERFUL OPPORTUNITY TO EXPLORE FAITH

Alpha is a space where you can ask the questions you’ve always wanted to ask. The Alpha course explores faith, meaning and purpose. We get together every week to watch a talk and explore life’s biggest questions. Everyone is welcome.

Community Cafe run by the Real Junk Food Project

Opening hours are, Mondays 11am-3pm, Tuesday – Friday 10:30am – 2:30pm

We serve tea, coffee and cakes and a pay as you feel lunch from 12pm

Mass online

Every Sunday we stream and record the 11am Mass from St Joseph’s

You will find all the recordings on our youtube channel

And the latest or live Mass