Mike Suby has recently scored a number of pilots that have been picked up to series, including The CW’s Roswell, New Mexico. The show is developed by Carina Adly MacKenzie based on the Roswell High book series by Melinda Metz and stars Jeanine Mason, Nathan Parsons Tyler Blackburn, Lily Cowles, Michael Vlamis and Heather Hemmens. The series follows the daughter of undocumented immigrants who reluctantly returns to her hometown only to discover that her teenage crush is now a police officer and also an alien who has kept his spectacular abilities a secret. MacKenzie is also executive producing the Warner Bros. Television, CBS Television Studios & Amblin Television production with Brett Matthews, Justin Falvey & Darryl Frank (The Americans, Falling Skies), Lawrence Bender (Pulp Fiction, Inglorious Basterds), Kevin Kelly Brown (Trumbo, Seven Seconds), as well as Julie Plec who also directed the pilot. Suby has previously scored the Plec-created CW dramas The Vampire Diaries, The Originals and Containment. Roswell, New Mexico will premiere in early 2019 on the CW.

Suby also composed the music for the CBS drama pilot God Friended Me. The show is created by Steven Lilien & Bryan Wynbrandt (Gotham) and stars Brandon Micheal Hall, Joe Morton, Suraj Sharma, Violett Beane and Javicia Leslie. The series follows an outspoken atheist whose life is turned upside down when he receives a friend request on social media from God and unwittingly becomes an agent of change in the lives and destinies of others around him. Lilien & Wynbrandt are also executive producing the Warner Bros. Television production with Greg Berlanti & Sarah Schechter (Arrow, Supergirl) and Marcos Siega (The Following) who also directed the pilot episode. God Friended Me will premiere this fall on CBS. Visit the official show website for updates.

Suby has also scored the pilot for the Pretty Little Liars spin-off The Perfectionists. The show is developed by I. Marlene King based on Sara Shepard’s book of the same title and stars Sasha Pieterse, Janel Parrish, Sofia Carson, Sydney Park, Eli Brown, Graeme Thomas King, Kelly Rutherford and Hayley Erin. The drama is set in the town of Beacon Heights, a seemingly perfect town where a group of three college friends struggle with the stress of being overachievers. King is also executive producing the Warner Horizon Scripted Television production with Lisa Cochran-Neilan, Leslie Morgenstein, Charlie Craig and Gina Girolamo. Suby has previously composed the music for all seasons of the original Pretty Little Liars. The composer is also scoring the King-created Freeform series Famous in Love, which currently airs every Wednesday night. The Perfectionists will premiere in 2019 on Freeform.