Seto (seto kiil')

Seto is spoken mainly in the Setomaa region of southeast Estonia. It is classified as a dialect of South Estonian, or as a dialect of Eastern Võro, however the Seto people (Setokõsõq) consider themselves culturally distinct from the Võro people (Võrokõsõq). In 2011 there were about 12,500 speakers of Seto, most of whom are older people. Younger people are more likely to speak Estonian.

People started writing Seto during the early 21st century. There is no standard way to do so, and each writer has their own spelling system. Some spelling systems are based on Estonian, others are based on Võro.

There is a weekly news program on the radio in Seto, and the language is used to some extent in newspapers and books. There is also a strong tradition of singing in Seto, particularly of choral singing, which is known as leelo.

Seto alphabet

Download an alphabet chart for Seto (Excel)

Sample text in Seto

Kõik inemiseq sünnüseq avvo ja õiguisi poolõst ütesugumaidsist. Näile om annõt mudsu ja süämetun'stus ja nä piät ütstõõsõga vele muudu läbi kjauma.

Translation

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

(Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights)

Sample videos in Seto

Links

Information about the Seto language and people

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seto_dialect

https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idioma_seto

https://www.visitsetomaa.ee/et/seto-kiil

Seto Instituut

http://www.setoinstituut.ee

Finnic languages

Estonian, Finnish, Karelian, Kven, Livvi-Karelian, Livonian, Ludic, Meänkieli, Seto, Veps, Võro, Votic

Languages written with the Latin alphabet

Page last modified: 01.08.23

[top]

Why not share this page:

If you like this site and find it useful, you can support it by making a donation via PayPal or Patreon, or by contributing in other ways. Omniglot is how I make my living.

Note: all links on this site to Amazon.com , Amazon.co.uk and Amazon.fr are affiliate links. This means I earn a commission if you click on any of them and buy something. So by clicking on these links you can help to support this site.

Get a 30-day Free Trial of Amazon Prime (UK)