William S. Burroughs's Biography

William Seward Burroughs was born into a wealthy family in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1914. His grandfather founded the Burroughs Adding Machine company, and his father owned a store called Cobblestone Gardens. Money was never an issue for Burroughs, who attended private school and was given a monthly salary from his parents well into adulthood.

In 1932, Burroughs left home to continue his education at Harvard University. After graduating in 1936, he traveled to Europe, where he experienced homosexual relationships for the first time. He married a Jewish woman in order to help her escape the Nazis. The two later divorced. When the United States entered World War II after the bombing at Pearl Harbor, Burroughs enlisted in the army but was later released due to concerns about his mental health. The rejection caused him to turn to drugs, eventually becoming addicted to morphine and heroin.

In 1943, Burroughs moved to New York City. There, he met Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, who would become two of Burroughs's closest friends and, along with Burroughs, principle figures in the Beat Generation. A year late, Burroughs began living with Joan Vollmer Adams. Although they never had an official marriage, Vollmer lived with Burroughs as his common-law wife.

Burroughs, Kerouac, and Ginsberg are considered the founding members of the Beat Generation. The Beat Generation was a literary movement situated in post-war America that rejected traditional values, social norms, and economic materialism.

Beat writers celebrated sexual liberation and resistance to conformity. The Beat Generation was largely influenced by jazz music and argued that one could find heightened awareness through jazz music, sex, and drug usage.

Burroughs' Naked Lunch (1959), Ginsberg's Howl (1956), and Kerouac's On the Road (1957) encompass some of the major literature of the Beat Generation.

Burroughs was often in trouble with the law for misdemeanors, causing him to flee to Mexico with his family in 1949. They intended to stay in Mexico for five years, but their time was cut short when Burroughs shot and killed Vollmer after a drunken prank gone wrong. He awaited trial in Mexico for a while before returning to the United States, where he was given a two-year suspended sentence.

Burroughs then spent time wandering through the Amazon searching for a drug called yagé; this experience is recorded in his book The Yage Letters (1963). Facing legal issues and the loss of his family, Burroughs spent the next several years traveling to Rome, London,Paris, andTangier.

He published his first novel, Junkie: Confessions of an Unredeemed Drug Addict (later republished as Junky in 1977), under the pseudonym William Lee in 1953. This novel is considered confessional, as it delves into drug ("junky") culture and is influenced by Burroughs's own struggle with drug use. Junky was followed by the highly-controversial Naked Lunch, published in Paris in 1959 but not published in the United States until 1962 due to obscenity laws.

Naked Lunch became notorious for its controversial depiction of sexuality (especially homosexuality). The Commonwealth of Massachusetts actually prosecuted the novel in a court case, claiming that the book violated obscenity laws. The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court declared that the book was not obscene in 1966. Naked Lunch is still banned in many schools today.

Around the same time as the novel's release, Burroughs began experimenting with the cut-up literary technique, which he popularized with British writer and artist Brion Gysin. In this literary technique, a written text is cut up and rearranged to create an entirely new text. It was intended to promote new ways of thinking, free readers from conventional limitations, and give new life to language.

The cut-up technique is the literary equivalent of a collage in the visual arts.

Burroughs's later novels used the cut-up technique extensively. A few of these works include The Soft Machine (1961), Exterminator! (1973), Cities of the Red Night (1981), Queer (1985), The Western Lands (1987), and My Education: A Book of Dreams (1995). Burroughs's experimentation with traditional structures of the novel situates him firmly in the postmodernist movement.

Burroughs settled in Kansas in 1981. His novel Queer, written in 1952, was finally published in 1985. Burroughs was inducted into the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters in 1983. He continued using heroin until the end of his life and died at the age of 83 from a heart attack.

Junky

Junky, Burroughs's first novel, also follows the character William Lee and his experiences in the world of "junk" (or drugs). Lee is addicted to heroin and becomes increasingly more dependent on it as the novel progresses. He lives in New York City, and the novel opens with him shooting morphine for the first time. Lee has a wife and kids, but his relationship with drugs takes center stage in his life and the novel. He becomes involved in the underground world of New York City, selling drugs to make enough money to fuel his own habit.

Lee's life soon centers entirely around drugs. When he gets in trouble with a group of police informants, he escapes New York and travels to Texas, where he is sober for a few months. Lee becomes bored with life and starts having sex with men to entertain himself. This doesn't work for long, and he soon starts shooting heroin again to avoid his boredom. Throughout the novel, Lee falls into a cycle of sobriety followed by boredom and drug use. At the end of the novel, he travels to South America in order to find a new mind-altering drug.

William S. Burroughs's Quotes and Writing

Below are some of Burroughs's most famous quotes.

Silence is only frightening to people who are compulsively verbalizing."

Burroughs originally said this quote in an interview in the 1960s, and it was printed in the collection The Job: Interviews with William S. Burroughs (1969). Burroughs valued silence and was especially weary of politicians who spoke just to hear themselves speak. Like many Beat writers, Burroughs was a non-conformist and did not particularly trust the government or traditional values.

[Most drug addicts] did not start using drugs for any reason they can remember. They just drifted along until they got hooked. If you have never been addicted, you can have no clear idea what it means to need junk with the addict’s special need. You don’t decide to be an addict. One morning you wake up sick and you’re an addict."

This quote is included in the prologue of Burroughs's Junky. As mentioned above, Burroughs explores much of his own relationship with drugs in this novel. Drugs and their effects are a central theme in much of Burroughs's work, and many rebels in the Beat Generation romanticized drug use. In this quote, Burroughs reveals the complicated mind of a drug addict—it's not that they want to get addicted to drugs, it's that they were running from something else, and now they can't stop.

The junk merchant doesn't sell his product to the consumer, he sells the consumer to his product. He does not improve and simplify his merchandise. He degrades and simplifies the client. (Introduction)”

Coming from Naked Lunch, this quote once again reveals the gritty world of drugs. The narrator implies that drug addicts are dehumanized by the supplier, who only cares about making money. The more the consumer buys, the more addicted they become and the more money the "merchant" makes.

William S. Burroughs - Key takeaways

William S. Burroughs was born in St. Louis, Missouri in 1914.

He was a famous writer in the Beat Generation, along with Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac.

Burroughs was addicted to heroin for most of his life and recorded his experiences in drug culture in many of his novels and short stories.

Burroughs is most famous for his 1959 novel Naked Lunch, which was the subject of an obscenity trial for its lurid, taboo content.

Burroughs died in 1997 from a heart attack.