Adorable photos of Hiten Tejwani and Gauri Pradhan

Hiten Tejwani and Gauri Pradhan are arguably one of the most-loved TV couples. The duo has starred together in hit shows like Kutumb and Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi besides participating in the dance reality show Nach Baliye. They were not only a hit onscreen couple, but also became real-life companions offscreen. (All photos/Hiten Tejwani's Instagram account)

Hiten Tejwani grew up in a Sindhi family in Mumbai and Gauri Pradhan, daughter of an Indian Army officer, is from Jammu. They first met at an ad shoot of a soap. After that, they worked together on the popular TV show Kutumb.

In Kutumb, Hiten and Gauri shared great chemistry and were loved by fans. They hit it off well offscreen too. After Kutumb, they both worked together in Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi.

Hiten Tejwani was 30 when he married Gauri, who is four years younger to him. The couple, who got married on April 29, 2004, completes 16 years of marriage this year (2020).

It is said that in 2002, Hiten Tejwani and Gauri Pradhan had a registered court marriage, and after two years, they had a wedding ceremony in the presence of their family.

Hiten Tejwani and Gauri Pradhan had hosted a grand reception which was attended by many famous personalities from the television industry.

Before tying the knot with Gauri Pradhan, Hiten Tejwani had been married once before, though his first marriage lasted only for 11 months.

Talking about re-marrying, Hiten Tejwani had told mid-day, 'Rather than a perfect age, it's got more to do with emotional maturity and financial independence. You have to be prepared to shoulder the responsibility of a partner and think things through before jumping into the deep end. Long-term planning is key.'

On November 11, 2009, Gauri Pradhan gave birth to twins - son Nevaan and daughter Katya. The kids are now 11-years-old and Hiten, like any other father, keeps sharing their candid pictures on Instagram. He posted this picture and captioned it - I love my children beyond all reason. They're my joy, even when they're wild with kid energy. Love you, my babies.

Gauri Pradhan took a five-year-long break after having twins, son Nevaan and daughter Katya in 2009.

Hiten Tejwani and Gauri Pradhan have taken part in many reality shows like Nach Baliye 2, Jodi Kamaal Ki, Kabhi Kabhi Pyaar, Kabhi Kabhi Yaar and Nach Baliye 4.

The couple was last seen on TV in a cameo in 'Kumkum' in 2009. Talking about their reunion on television, Gauri had told mid-day, 'Everyone is expecting me and Hiten to work together. Till now we have not been offered anything. But I think we will soon work together.'

'Now that I am back on TV and people are going to see me and I think we will be getting offers soon,' Gauri added further.

Talking about Gauri, Hiten was quoted saying, 'She is a special gift from the heavens. Her smile warms my heart and her presence makes me whole. I love you Gauri, today and forever.'

Hiten Tejwani and Gauri Pradhan are fond of travelling and they often holiday together. Interestingly, the couple has also won many awards together.

Even close friends consider Gauri and Hiten the perfect couple. While many celeb couples often go through a rough patch in their relationship, Gauri and Hiten have been steady for years!