KABUL -- Ahmad Masud was 12 years old when his father, the legendary anti-Taliban military commander known as the "Lion of Panjshir," was killed by two Al-Qaeda suicide bombers in northern Afghanistan on September 9, 2001.

The assassination of Ahmad Shah Masud, who also fought for a decade against Soviet invaders, removed a natural U.S. ally from Taliban-ruled Afghanistan. Two days later, Al-Qaeda carried out the September 11 terrorist attacks against the United States.

The tumultuous events thrust the young Masud into the public eye -- making his first public appearance at his father's funeral in the Panjshir Valley north of Kabul, a historic event attended by hundreds of thousands of the slain ethnic-Tajik commander's supporters.

Standing beside his father's coffin with poise and dignity in one of the few parts of Afghanistan that was not under Taliban control at the time, the 12-year-old Masud provoked an outburst of hysterical grieving by announcing: "I want to follow in my father's footsteps. I want to secure our country's independence. I want to be my father's successor."

Since then, alongside his father's status as an iconic national hero, the young Masud has been revered by many Afghans who see him as a symbol of hope for Afghanistan's future.

Today, 15 years later, he says he remains committed to his vow of making his father's dreams become reality -- to make Afghanistan a "united and free country" with leaders chosen by the Afghan people through democratic elections.

Now 27, Masud has nearly completed a degree in international relations at King's College London.

But he returns to Afghanistan each year to be with his family as the country commemorates Masud Day, a national holiday, on September 9 that launches Martyrs Week, honoring Afghan victims of more than three decades of war.

Criticism

Ahmad Masud refers to his father as "the Martyr," telling RFE/RL that at least one of the assassinated commander's dreams for Afghanistan is starting to come true.

"The elections that were held in the past several years -- regardless of their results, just the fact that there were elections -- that's one of the key factors of a democracy, and it demonstrates that one of the wishes of the Martyr is slowly coming true," he told RFE/RL.

But Ahmad is critical of the failure of Afghanistan's government to safeguard people from militant attacks, ethnic strife, and sectarian violence or to create the economic opportunities needed to prevent young Afghans from fleeing the country.

"Without any doubt, these circumstances and the emigration are frustrating," he told RFE/RL.

"Our young generation considers the situation so dire that they do all they can to leave," he said. "It's really frustrating and disturbing."

Masud said he thinks refugees who flee Afghanistan "still love their country."

But he says the government must do more to "fight insecurity and work to bring security and stability" if it is going to end an exodus that already has been joined by millions of Afghan refugees.

"I hope the government comes up with a plan to create jobs," he told RFE/RL. "One of the important reasons for the emigration is that people are looking for a better life, a more stable future. It all goes back to the issue of employment and security."

As for himself, Masud says he will return to Afghanistan permanently after he completes his education in London.

He says the reason for his university studies is to "come back" and fulfill the vow he made at his father's funeral.

He insists that he is "completely devoted" to Afghanistan and has no property outside of the country.

Asked about his political ambitions, Masud said he would take on the duties of public office "if it is the will of the Afghan people."

If he failed to be elected, Masud said, he would still stay in Afghanistan and work as a teacher.

Written by Ron Synovitz with reporting by RFE/RL's Radio Free Afghanistan correspondent Hamid Mohmand in Kabul

Welcome to The Azadi Briefing, an RFE/RL newsletter that unpacks the key issues in Afghanistan. To subscribe, click here.

I'm Abubakar Siddique, a senior correspondent at RFE/RL's Radio Azadi. Here's what I've been tracking and what I'm keeping an eye on in the days ahead.

The Key Issue

An Afghan press-freedom watchdog says media freedom continues to decline as the Taliban marks three years in power.

In a new report on August 13, the Afghanistan Journalist Center (AFJC) said the Taliban's brutal treatment of the media was on the rise.

Its government issued "new guidelines" to reign in the once vibrant Afghan press, which was already reeling from pressure to implement 14 detailed instructions the group had issued during the previous two years.

The report said that during the past year of Taliban rule, it decreed what kind of language and terminologies the Afghan print and electronic media should use.

As part of its growing restrictions, the group has banned photography and filming of all meetings in the southern province of Kandahar, where Taliban Supreme Leader Mullah Haibatullah Akhundzada lives.

Hamid Obidi, the head of the AFJC, said the Taliban's three years in power had proved it doesn't believe "in a free press and the citizen's right to access free information."

The AFJC documented 181 cases of threats, detentions, and convictions of journalists from August 2023 to the present.

Exiled Afghan journalists in the West say the Taliban has detained more than 300 journalists during the past three years.

Why It's Important: The Taliban has attempted to systematically dismantle the freedoms previously enjoyed by the Afghan press because it sees it as a legacy of the fallen Afghan republic and its Western allies.

The Islamist group has not honored any of its early promises to allow freedom of the press. Instead, it wants Afghan journalists to “reorient their thinking,” according to the AFJC, whose report cites statements by senior Taliban officials.

Taliban actions speak much louder than its promises. Intimidation by its officials has forced hundreds of journalists into exile. Taliban restrictions or the loss of Western funding has forced scores of Afghan media outlets to shut down.

In order to deny Afghans access to the free flow of information, it has banned international broadcasters whose content in Pashto and Dari is widely popular. The Taliban has also denied visas to independent foreign correspondents.

What's Next: The Taliban has been quite successful in shaping a media environment inside Afghanistan that serves its government.

Its restrictions even prompt independent media outlets inside Afghanistan to self-censor and avoid critical reporting.

Waning international interest in Afghanistan and the lack of access to the country make in-depth reporting from the government very difficult.

All this has paved the way for the Taliban to replace journalism with propaganda.

What To Keep An Eye On

Ten major international nongovernmental aid groups have called for more Western donor engagement with the Taliban's unrecognized government.

CARE, the Danish Refugee Council, Save the Children International, and other groups have called on Western capitals to rethink their approach to the Taliban.

"Diplomatic engagement is crucial to creating an enabling environment in Afghanistan that will support upscaling international aid efforts to include development projects alongside emergency assistance," the NGOs said in a joint statement on August 13.

International donors have suspended most of their funding for Afghanistan over the Taliban's ban on most education and employment for women and its reportedly extensive human rights abuses.

The statement said the current "isolationist approach" of donor countries does not help alleviate the suffering of Afghans as they face one of the world's largest humanitarian crises.

More than half of Afghanistan's 40 million population needs humanitarian assistance, but funding for the crises is declining, with only 25 percent of the funds pledged for the current UN humanitarian appeal of more than $3 billion.

Why It's Important: The statement is part of a new trend that favors engagement over pressure to change the Taliban's behavior.

It is, however, not clear whether the Taliban will commit to reversing its extremist policies if its government is recognized and receives international assistance.

That's all from me for now.

Don't forget to send me any questions, comments, or tips that you have. You can always reach us at azadi.english@rferl.org

Until next time,

Abubakar Siddique

If you enjoyed this briefing and don't want to miss the next edition, subscribe here. It will be sent to your inbox every Friday.

At least 1.4 million girls in Afghanistan have been denied access to secondary education since the Taliban returned to power in 2021, UNESCO, the United Nations' cultural agency, said on August 15.

"In just three years, the de facto authorities have almost wiped out two decades of steady progress for education in Afghanistan, and the future of an entire generation is now in jeopardy," the agency said in a statement.

It comes as the Taliban marked three years since its forces seized Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, on August 15, 2021, after the U.S.-backed government collapsed and its leaders fled into exile.

Since the Taliban's return to power, women have been squeezed from public life -- banned from many jobs as well as parks and gyms -- and barred from secondary and higher education.

The restrictions amount to what the United Nations has described as "gender apartheid."

There are now nearly 2.5 million girls deprived of their right to education, representing 80 percent of Afghan school-age girls, UNESCO said. This represents an increase of 300,000 since the previous count carried out by the UN agency in April 2023.

"As a result of bans imposed by the de facto authorities, at least 1.4 million girls have been deliberately denied access to secondary education since 2021," UNESCO said.

Access to primary education has also fallen sharply, with 1.1 million fewer girls and boys attending school, the agency added. It blamed the drop on the authorities' decision to ban female teachers from teaching boys as well as the lack of incentive for parents to send children to school.

The agency is "alarmed by the harmful consequences of this increasingly massive drop-out rate, which could lead to a rise in child labor and early marriage."

Enrolment in higher education is equally concerning, the statement said, adding that the number of university students had decreased by 53 percent since 2021.

UNESCO Director-General Audrey Azoulay urged the international community to remain mobilized "to obtain the unconditional reopening of schools and universities to Afghan girls and women."

Lack of access to education has been among the main points of criticism by Afghans toward the Taliban authorities.

"There are those who are not literate enough, and more importantly, a part of society, women, are deprived of education, and this is a big problem for the people of Afghanistan," a male resident of the northern Balkh Province who preferred not to be named due to security concerns, told RFE/RL's Radio Azadi.

"The issues of education -- women's education and work -- and their participation at national and international level have been completely nullified and pushed to the sidelines," a female resident of Kabul, who also preferred not to be named, said.

The Taliban celebrates their return to power both in mid-August around the date Kabul fell and at the end of the month, when the last U.S.-led international troops left Afghanistan.

The withdrawal, agreed by the United States and the Taliban on February 29, 2020, allowed the radical Islamist movement's return to power 20 years after being ousted by U.S. forces following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States.

The Taliban government remains unrecognized by any other state.

WATCH: Rights groups have documented targeted killings, disappearances, and extrajudicial arrests of hundreds of former Afghan service personnel, while RFE/RL has spoken to two women who say they live in fear due to their past roles in the military.

Embed share

The code has been copied to your clipboard.

width px height px

The URL has been copied to your clipboard

No media source currently available

0:00 0:04:32 0:00

International aid organizations have warned that millions of Afghans struggle in "one of the world's largest and most complex humanitarian crises, three years after the change in power."

"Heavily dependent on humanitarian aid, Afghans are trapped in cycles of poverty, displacement, and despair," a statement by 10 aid groups -- including Save the Children, World Vision, Islamic Relief Worldwide, and the International Rescue Committee -- said on August 13.

Women and girls are among the most seriously affected by this humanitarian crisis, Human Rights Watch has said. The Taliban has created "the world's most serious women's rights crisis," the organization said on August 11.

With reporting by AFP

Fatima and her young son fled their home soon after the Taliban seized power in Afghanistan in 2021.

A former lawmaker, she was in danger of reprisals from the hard-line Islamist group.

But three years after the Taliban takeover, Fatima lives with her 7-year-old son in limbo in Albania, waiting to be resettled to the United States.

"The uncertainty is excruciating," said the single mother, whose name has been changed to protect her identity. "Our futures are hanging in the balance."

Fatima was among the hundreds of thousands of at-risk Afghans who escaped their homeland after the collapse of the Western-backed Afghan government and the Taliban's seizure of power.

The United States and its allies airlifted tens of thousands of Afghans out of the country during the chaotic and deadly evacuation of Kabul.

Fatima was among those who fled by road to neighboring Pakistan. From there, several thousand Afghans were relocated temporarily to Albania as they waited for their U.S. visas to be processed.

But three years on from the Taliban takeover, dozens of Afghans remain stranded in the small Balkan country.

"It is painful not to know what's wrong with my case," said Fatima, who lives in an apartment in the capital, Tirana. "Why is it being delayed?"

According to the State Department, more than 160,000 Afghans have been resettled in the United States under the Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) program since September 2021. SIVs are intended for Afghans who served the U.S. government or U.S.-led NATO forces in Afghanistan for at least one year.

U.S. allies in the West have also taken in tens of thousands of Afghans.

Afghans who do not qualify for SIVs can apply for the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP), which gives special priority status for Afghans who worked for U.S.-government funded projects in Afghanistan, interpreters for the U.S. government, and stringers for U.S.-based media organizations.

The application process for SIVs and resettlement through USRAP can take years, and advocacy groups have said the programs are proceeding too slowly.

That has meant that thousands of Afghans hoping to resettle in the United States have remained in extended limbo in third countries, including in Albania, Kosovo, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates.

'Adding To Our Anxiety'

Fatima admits she is lucky to be alive. But she also revealed that the uncertainty has taken a toll on her.

"I never even took a pill for a headache," she said. "But I now take medication three times a day."

The former member of parliament is not allowed to work. She makes ends meet with the help of a Washington-based nongovernmental organization. Her son attends a local school, although the language barrier has deprived him of a meaningful education, she said.

Fatima is not alone.

Ahad, a former Afghan military officer, is among the around 40 Afghans stranded in Albania.

Ahad, who requested his real name not be used for security reasons, lives with his four children and wife in a resort town along the Adriatic coast.

Each member of the family receives a $50 monthly stipend from the UN's refugee agency, the UNHCR. But Ahad says the money is barely enough to pay the rent for their small apartment.

"Mounting financial problems are adding to our anxiety," he said.

Unable to work, Ahad says he has accumulated debts to local shopkeepers from whom he has received food and other essential items.

'Why Have They Left Us Here?'

The U.S. State Department says the cases of Afghans in Albania are being considered under the U.S. refugee program.

"We are focused on increasing capacity, expediting processing, and resolving long-delayed applications," a U.S. State Department spokesperson told RFE/RL in written comments. "While continuing to maintain the program's rigorous screening and vetting standard."

The spokesperson said the State Department is "issuing SIVs to Afghan partners at record rates."

In the last U.S. fiscal year that ended in September 2023, the State Department issued more than 18,000 SIVs to Afghans, the most in a single year, the spokesperson said.

"In this fiscal year (FY2024), we have already surpassed that figure," the spokesperson added.

But the assurances from Washington have not quelled the concerns of Afghans stuck in Albania.

"Why have they left us here when they even evacuated animals from Afghanistan?" said Fatima, referring to the British government's evacuation of animals from Kabul in 2021 even as London left behind thousands of at-risk Afghans who had worked with the British military.

Going back to Afghanistan is not an option for Fatima or Ahad.

The Taliban declared a general amnesty shortly after seizing power that included all Afghan officials, security forces, and individuals who cooperated with the departed U.S.-led military presence in Afghanistan.

But international rights watchdogs and the United Nations have documented widespread cases of retribution including extrajudicial killings and torture.

Ahad says if he does not qualify for resettlement to the United States, Washington should help him move to a third country.

"I want our misfortune to end," he said.

Days after the Taliban seized power in 2021, Lieutenant General Faiz Hameed, the powerful head of Pakistan's notorious Inter-Services Intelligence agency, took what seemed a victory lap in the Afghan capital, Kabul.

"Please don't worry -- everything will be OK," he told a Western journalist while smiling and sipping tea in the five-star Sarena Hotel.

Allies Turn Into Enemies

But three years later, Pakistan's sense of scoring a strategic victory by helping the Taliban to reclaim power has vanished as the Taliban-led government has cemented its position as Pakistan's key foe.

Islamabad accuses the Taliban of sheltering the Tehrik-e Taliban (TTP), which has killed hundreds of its soldiers since 2021. Repeated Pakistani air strikes on the TTP's alleged hideouts inside Afghanistan and diplomatic warnings of severe consequences have not led to the Taliban reigning in the group as Islamabad has frequently demanded.

On August 14, Torkham, the main border crossing connecting Pakistan and Afghanistan, remained closed for a third day after a firefight that injured several Taliban fighters and at least three Pakistani soldiers on August 12. The Taliban said three Afghan civilians were killed in the cross fire.

Such clashes are almost a weekly occurrence along their 2,500-kilometer border.

Frequent border closures and the expulsion of nearly 1 million impoverished Afghans from Pakistan have also failed to pressure Afghanistan's current rulers to acquiesce to Islamabad's demands.

"The situation has turned 180 degrees," said Ihsanullah Tipu Mehsud, news director at the Khorasan Diary, a website tracking militant groups in Afghanistan and Pakistan. "There is now a conflict situation inching toward a war."

In a conciliatory gesture on Pakistan's Independence Day on August 14, the country's powerful army chief, General Asim Munir, asked the Taliban-led government to reciprocate Islamabad's desire for cordial, cooperative relations.

He asked the Taliban-led government not to "prioritize" ties with the TTP over relations with Pakistan.

"Just as Pakistan has always helped you out, you should join us in finishing off this scourge," he told a gathering of new military graduates.

Reverse Strategic Depth

But Michael Semple, a former EU and UN adviser to Afghanistan, told RFE/RL it would be difficult for the Taliban to give up on the TTP's nearly two-decade campaign when it sees a tipping point given the grave political and economic crises engulfing Pakistan.

"Can the level of backing which [the TTP militants] are receiving from the Afghan Taliban change?" asked Semple, a professor at Queen's University Belfast.

After the Taliban's return to power, the TTP emerged with new vigor. It had retreated to Afghanistan in 2014 after a Pakistani military operation and U.S. drone attacks decimated its ranks and leadership.

As a close ideological and organizational ally, the TTP cloned the Taliban insurgency's tactics. It mainly targeted security forces while establishing a shadow government to challenge Islamabad's authority in some border regions.

Semple said there is now "mounting evidence" that the General Directorate of Intelligence, the Taliban spy service, is supporting the TTP with the blessing of its supreme leader, Mullah Haibatullah Akhundzada.

"There's this dream of achieving the strategic depth -- being sort of the senior partner in delivering a Shari'a-based system in Pakistan," he said.

"Strategic depth" once denoted a Pakistani military doctrine. After Islamabad became a frontline state against the 1979-1989 Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, its military planners pushed for eventually dominating the neighboring country so it could be used as a rear base in case of a war with its archrival India.

In Islamabad, Mehsud said a sizeable number of Afghan Taliban fighters seem to be embedded in the TTP. He noted some Taliban-allied clerics have repeatedly issued fatwas or religious decrees supporting the TTP's campaign in Pakistan.

"Things will keep on getting worse," he said, adding that the Pakistani government claims at least 15 suicide bombers who conducted attacks in Pakistan were Afghan nationals.

Interdependence

But Sami Yousafzai, a veteran Afghan journalist and commentator, said high anti-Pakistan sentiment among Afghans who blame Islamabad for their misery prompted the Taliban to adopt hard-line public positions against Islamabad.

"Being seen as Pakistani proxy by the Afghans is a major disadvantage for the Taliban," he said.

Islamabad's covert military support enabled the Taliban to sweep through most of Afghanistan by 1996. Pakistan then joined Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to formally recognize the first Taliban-led government after it seized Kabul in September 1996.

"This relationship gets very tense at times, but they can still reach an understanding," he said.

Hameed Hakimi, an Afghanistan expert at London's Chatham House think tank, sees relations between the Taliban and Pakistan shifting toward greater interdependence.

He said Islamabad is unlikely to seek "instability in relations" with Afghanistan at a time when India is cementing its role as a regional hegemon because of its rising global clout.

He said the Taliban's relations with Pakistani Islamist factions are much more profound than its ties with Islamabad's security establishment.

"These contacts and networks immediately come into play when there is a risk of escalation of violence between Kabul and Islamabad," he told RFE/RL.

The Taliban craves recognition by the international community that it is the only group capable of ruling and establishing security in Afghanistan.

But not only has the militant group failed to achieve that status in its three years in power, rival extremist groups like Islamic State-Khorasan (IS-K) are mocking it for trying.

IS-K has accused the Taliban of abandoning jihad, or holy war, and bowing to the foreign states it once fought to secure foreign aid and investment.

That is the narrative promoted by the Afghanistan-based branch of the Islamic State (IS) extremist group as it looks to recruit belligerent Taliban fighters into its ranks.

To lure Taliban fighters, IS-K has conducted attacks within and outside Afghanistan that undermine the Taliban's rule.

IS-K has also employed a sophisticated and multilingual propaganda network to cast itself as the only option for hardened Taliban fighters who want to continue warring against foreigners and sectarian adversaries.

"This is a very powerful and potent strategy, and it is likely already working," said Lucas Webber, co-founder of Militant Wire and research fellow at the Soufan Center. "There are reports of defections."

Some Taliban rank-and-file, Webber says, may be fighting the complacency that comes with the day-to-day monotony of running a state.

"A lot of these fighters, they grew up their whole lives fighting the United States and the international coalition, and they come from the global jihadist movement, the historic legacy of fighting the Soviets and fighting the Americans and their Western allies," Webber said. "Now a lot of them are stuck, bored, doing administrative jobs."

The Taliban has tightened its grip on power since seizing Kabul in August 2021 and tried to capitalize on its gains to boost its image as a stabilizing force inside Afghanistan and in the region.

"The consolidation of power has improved peace and stability internally and resulted in other positive benefits such as reduced corruption, decreased opium cultivation, and enhanced revenue generation," the UN monitoring team in Afghanistan reported in early July.

But the hard-line Islamist group's widespread human rights abuses and failure to establish a government inclusive of women and the country's various religious and ethnic groups has left its biggest goal -- international recognition -- out of reach.

It is a situation that, combined with multiple humanitarian, environmental, and economic crises, has hampered international aid and investment and undermined the Taliban's de facto government.

So, too, have the actions of IS-K, a group founded in 2015 by disgruntled members of the Afghan Taliban and the Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan and which subsumed the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, according to Webber.

When IS militants claimed responsibility for the deadliest terrorist attack in Russia in two decades in March, suspicion immediately fell directly on IS-K.

The Taliban, which has tried to neutralize IS-K and assuage concerns that Afghanistan is a haven for extremist groups, repeated its denials that the organization was operating on Afghan soil.

But there is a wealth of evidence to show that the Taliban recognizes the threat IS-K poses both militarily and ideologically to its rule.

Just prior to the Moscow bombing in March, Afghan media published an internal document attributed to the General Directorate of Intelligence (GDI), the Taliban's notorious intelligence agency, which acknowledged IS recruitment efforts in the central Wardak Province. The document discussed the possibility that Taliban members who left the group during a recent effort to purge the ranks of undesirable fighters might have enlisted to fight for IS.

The UN monitoring team in early July warned that IS-K had grown in numbers and succeeded in infiltrating the Taliban's GDI as well as its Defense and Interior ministries.

In late July, Afghan media reported the arrest of 20 GDI members accused of working for IS-K in the western Herat Province, leading to the dismissal of the security body's regional head.

For every step the Taliban takes to burnish its image at home and abroad, IS-K is doing its best to undermine it.

IS-K seeks to establish a caliphate, or Islamic state, in Khorasan, a historical region that includes parts of modern-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, and Central Asia.

"The group's narrative aims to reduce the Taliban's credibility among the Afghan population and trigger sectarian fault lines, promoting the idea that the Taliban has deviated from Islamic principles, while portraying itself as advancing the 'wider Khorasan,'" a UN Security Council committee reported in late July.

Externally, that means conducting attacks in Tajikistan, Iran, and Pakistan, as well as in Russia.

In Afghanistan itself, IS-K attacks undercut the Taliban's argument that it has established the type of security demanded by potential foreign investors from China and other states willing to work with the de facto government.

In March, IS-K killed 21 people, most of them Taliban employees, at a bank in the southern city of Kandahar.

Two months later, IS-K killed six foreign and local tourists in the central city of Bamiyan. The Bamiyan Buddhas were infamously reduced to rubble by the Taliban's first regime just before it was ousted by U.S.-led forces in 2001. Since retaking power, the Taliban has taken the remains of the Buddhas under its protection as it attempts to lure foreign, particularly Chinese, tourists to visit the UNESCO site.

IS-K has used such attacks to flip some Taliban fighters to its side, boasting in a statement following the killings in Bamiyan that it had targeted foreign tourists and "Shi'a" living in the area. A Sunni extremist group, IS-K considers Shi'ite Muslims apostates.

Riccardo Valle, director of research for The Khorasan Diary, said following the attack IS-K pointed out differences between the first Taliban regime that destroyed the Bamiyan Buddhas and the current one.

"They are saying that once the Afghan Taliban were correctly applying religion, so they were destroying these idols," Valle said. But today IS-K has accused the Taliban of protecting the Bamiyan Buddhas "so that the Chinese can in return grant financial assistance, economic assistance to Afghanistan."

The violence, Valle says, is part of IS-K's effort to disrupt the Taliban's economy and weaken its relations with foreign states.

"They are also speaking directly to Taliban soldiers, trying to show them that the Islamic State is the only actor carrying out jihad," Valle added. "They know that some Afghan Taliban might be willing to listen."

Welcome to The Azadi Briefing, an RFE/RL newsletter that unpacks the key issues in Afghanistan. To subscribe, click here.

I'm Abubakar Siddique, a senior correspondent at RFE/RL's Radio Azadi. Here's what I've been tracking and what I'm keeping an eye on in the days ahead.

The Key Issue

Afghans have widely criticized a viral video showing two Iranian police officers brutally restraining an Afghan teenager on a road in the capital, Tehran.

The victim, Mahdi Musavi, 16, is unconscious and under treatment for injuries he sustained when a police officer kneeled on his neck. At the same time, another plainclothes man held him tightly to the ground.

“I do not wish such a day for my enemies,” said Masuma Mohammadi, his mother. “My son suffers from hearing and speech disorders.”

The video, which first emerged on August 7, is amplifying Afghan fears that their increasing harassment and abuse in Iran is aimed at expelling the more than 4.3 million Afghan refugees and migrants that the UN estimates are currently living in the country.

During the past year, Iran expelled some 500,000 Afghans after its government announced a campaign to force undocumented foreigners to leave the country.

Why It's Important: Negative sentiments against Afghans have been rising in Iran since the growing influx of mostly impoverished Afghans began after the Taliban returned to power three years ago.

Iranian officials have consistently blamed Afghan migrants for crimes, unemployment, and other problems.

During the past year, Tehran’s campaign to expel undocumented foreigners appears to have affected the treatment of Afghans, with incidents of police brutality and mob violence against them on the rise.

On August 7, Iran’s semiofficial Mehr News Agency reported that police arrested 50 Afghans in Tehran’s Shahriar county as part of an “emergency plan to gather undocumented Afghans.”

Statements by Iranian officials indicate that an official drive to create conditions to force impoverished Afghans to leave by the end of the year is in full force.

On August 6, Majid Shuja, the commander of border forces in Iran’s northeastern Razavi Khorasan Province, said his forces have arrested and deported more than 15,000 Afghans to the neighboring Afghan province of Herat so far this year.

Ahmad Moqori, a senior law enforcement official in the northwestern East Azerbaijan Province, said Afghans can no longer live in the region even if they have legal documents allowing them to reside there.

East Azerbaijan is the latest among the growing number of Iran’s 31 provinces where Afghans can no longer live.

What's Next: Afghans are often likely to be victims of mob violence and abuse by Iranian law enforcement.

Yet widespread poverty and skyrocketing unemployment in Afghanistan is likely to push large numbers of Afghans to continue to look for work in Iran.

What To Keep An Eye On

Climate change has displaced more Afghans during the first six months of this year than all of last year.

More than 38,000 Afghans were forced to leave their homes by the end of June compared to more than 37,000 in all of 2023.

Save the Children, a nongovernmental organization, said its analysis of the preliminary data collected by the International Displacement Monitoring Center shows that landslides, floods, avalanches, storms, droughts, and extreme temperatures are now the leading causes of why Afghans abandon their homes.

Since 1980, over four decades of war have turned Afghans into one of the largest displaced populations globally. But beginning in 2022, more Afghans are now being displaced by natural disasters caused by climate change.

“Afghanistan also had the highest number of children made homeless by climate disasters of any country in the world as of the end of 2023,” said the briefing.

Some 747,094 Afghan children were displaced by the end of last year.

Afghans are South Asia’s largest long-term displaced group and the second-most displaced globally, slightly behind Syrians.

Why It's Important: Afghanistan is one of the most vulnerable countries to the ravages of climate change.

But its cash-strapped Taliban government can do little to adapt and mitigate as international development funding disappears.

That's all from me for now.

Don't forget to send me any questions, comments, or tips that you have. You can always reach us at azadi.english@rferl.org

Until next time,

Abubakar Siddique

If you enjoyed this briefing and don't want to miss the next edition, subscribe here. It will be sent to your inbox every Friday.

Fawad was already reeling from the deadly earthquake that struck western Afghanistan in October and severely damaged his home and crops.

But the Taliban dealt the small-scale farmer from the western Herat Province another crippling financial blow.

Fawad, who grows lentils and wheat, was recently forced to pay "ushr," an Islamic tax on harvests.

"We are overwhelmed by misery," Fawad, whose name has been changed to protect his identity, told RFE/RL's Radio Azadi. "But we are forced to pay taxes to the Taliban."

Since seizing power in 2021, the unrecognized and cash-strapped Taliban government has levied the harvest tax in a bid to boost revenue. While tax collection was initially sporadic and uneven across the country, it has been expanded nationwide.

But the tax have angered many farmers, who say the militant group has not taken into consideration the losses they have incurred.

Afghanistan has been the scene of a series of deadly natural disasters in recent years, including earthquakes, floods, and a severe drought, that have exacerbated the devastating humanitarian crisis in the country, the world's largest.

Taliban Taxes

The Taliban has imposed a 10 percent tax on harvests from irrigated land and a 5 percent levy on rainfed crops. It has described the payments as an obligation under Islamic law.

The Taliban has relied heavily on aggressive taxation to raise revenue. The militants have levied taxes on everything from moving goods on highways to hanging a sign in front of a shop.

But the Taliban government's lack of transparency and the loss of essential services has led to complaints about what Afghans are getting in return.

The previous Western-backed Afghan government did not impose Islamic taxes, including "zakat," a 2.5 percent levy on the estimated value of a person's possessions that the Taliban has also collected.

Zakat is one of the five pillars of Islam that are considered obligations for all Muslims.

During its 19-year insurgency, the Taliban collected ushr and zakat from Afghans living under its rule, including farmers who cultivated opium. Tax collection was a major source of revenue for the militants.

'I Have Nothing'

Awalmir is another Afghan farmer who is critical of the Taliban's aggressive tax collection.

Awalmir, who owns a farm outside of Kabul, says he was forced to give the Taliban around 45 kilograms of wheat from his 450-kilogram harvest this year.

"They made me pay it despite all the losses I had incurred because of torrential spring rains" that triggered deadly flash floods in parts of Afghanistan, he told Radio Azadi.

Ali Reza, a farmer in the northern Sar-e Pul Province, says the Taliban is levying high taxes on impoverished Afghans without providing any basic services to citizens in return.

"We want the Taliban government to fix our roads, build health-care clinics, and rebuild schools," he told Radio Azadi.

Qasim, a subsistence farmer in the northeastern province of Badakhshan, said floods in the spring destroyed some of his crops and he will be unable to pay ushr.

"I have nothing to give them," he said.

The Taliban's Agriculture Ministry did not respond to Radio Azadi's requests for comment.

Most Islamic countries do not impose compulsory Islamic taxes on their citizens. In some countries, citizens can donate zakat, which is meant for the poor and needy.

Critics of governments' collection of zakat include Islamic scholars and aid workers who say that the practice has failed to alleviate poverty in the Muslim world. They argue that the funds are often wasted and mismanaged.

One Afghan cleric, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of retribution, said the Taliban "is not even authorized" to collect Islamic taxes.

Under Islam, he said, Muslims are encouraged to make donations to the poor in their communities. Governments, he said, have no authority to impose and collect Islamic taxes.

Written by Abubakar Siddique based on reporting by RFE/RL's Radio Azadi.

Welcome to The Azadi Briefing, an RFE/RL newsletter that unpacks the key issues in Afghanistan. To subscribe, click here.

I'm Abubakar Siddique, senior correspondent at RFE/RL's Radio Azadi. Here's what I've been tracking and what I'm keeping an eye on in the days ahead.

The Key Issue

A new report by the United Nations says Afghanistan under Taliban rule is turning into a hub for extremist groups.

“Terrorism emanating from Afghanistan will be a driver of insecurity in the region and further afield,” said the report by the UN Security Council committee that monitors the Islamic State (IS) extremist group and the Al-Qaeda terrorist network.

Issued on July 22, the report details how extremist groups with thousands of fighters endanger the security of Afghanistan’s neighbors and pose a growing threat globally.

The report identified Islamic State-Khorasan (IS-K), the Afghanistan branch of IS, as the “most serious threat” in the Central and South Asia region and said the group was “projecting terror beyond Afghanistan.”

The report said Al-Qaeda was adopting “strategic patience” in Afghanistan. Building ties with the Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) extremist group that is waging an insurgency against Islamabad, Al-Qaeda could transform the Pakistani militants into a regional threat, the report warned.

“With Taliban acquiescence, and at times support, TTP has intensified attacks inside Pakistan,” the report said, noting that the Pakistani group is estimated to have around 6,500 fighters.

Why It's Important: Nearly three years after the Taliban’s return to power, there are increasing fears that Afghanistan is once again turning into the headquarters of global terrorism.

The Taliban has battled against IS-K and claims to have severely curtailed its operations in Afghanistan. But the Taliban’s alliances and relations with other extremist groups, including the TTP, have allowed militancy to flourish in the region.

For now, fewer Afghans are dying in terrorist attacks than in recent years, according to a new report by the Institute of Economics and Peace, an Australian think tank. But attacks by Afghanistan-based militant groups abroad are increasing.

External attacks by extremist groups based in Afghanistan could provoke retaliation against the Taliban. Islamabad has already carried out air strikes inside Afghanistan in response to TTP attacks.

The United States says it is working to prevent the reemergence of external terrorism threats from Afghanistan. Vedant Patel, a deputy spokesperson for the U.S. State Department, said on August 1 that Washington is employing international cooperation to ensure that Afghanistan does not become a launching pad for terrorist attacks.

What's Next: The Taliban is expected to keep fighting IS-K because of ideological differences.

But it is unlikely to stop harboring or clamp down on other extremist groups on Afghan soil. That will continue to make Afghanistan a threat to the region and beyond.

What To Keep An Eye On

The Taliban’s unrecognized government on July 30 announced that it was cutting ties with 14 Afghan diplomatic missions abroad and will cease to accept consular documents issued by those missions.

They include Afghan missions in Australia, Canada, Poland, Greece, London, Belgium, Berlin, Bonn, Switzerland, Austria, France, Italy, Sweden, and Norway.

But many of those missions have vowed to defy the Taliban and continue their consular and diplomatic services without any interruption.

“Until the Taliban take steps to gain domestic and international legitimacy, their announcements will have no bearing on our work,” Muhibullah Taib, an Afghan diplomat in Switzerland, told RFE/RL’s Radio Azadi.

The Taliban’s decision is likely to impact hundreds of thousands of Afghans based abroad.

“It will not allow Afghans to travel,” Hamza Khan, an Afghan living in France, told Radio Azadi. “We demand that the Taliban rescind this decision.”

Why It's Important: Since seizing power, the Taliban has tried to gain control of Afghan diplomatic missions abroad in a bid to boost its legitimacy.

So far, the Taliban has successfully assumed control of Afghan diplomatic missions in more than a dozen countries in the region.

But it now appears to be seeking to assert authority over missions in Western nations where Afghan diplomats appointed by the previous government have resisted working with the Taliban.

That's all from me for now.

Don't forget to send me any questions, comments, or tips that you have. You can always reach us at azadi.english@rferl.org

Until next time,

Abubakar Siddique

If you enjoyed this briefing and don't want to miss the next edition, subscribe here. It will be sent to your inbox every Friday.

The killing of Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of the EU- and U.S.-designated Palestinian terrorist group Hamas, has thrown the Middle East into crisis.

But his assassination in a suspected Israeli strike in Iran on July 31 and the heightened risk of a broader war also have implications in the wider region, including for Iran's eastern neighbors, Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Experts say Kabul and Islamabad will likely struggle with the security, economic, and political fallout from a major escalation in the Middle East.

But a potential regional war involving Iran is unlikely to directly drag in Taliban-ruled Afghanistan and Pakistan, both of which have cordial relations with Tehran, experts say.

"The attacks will not draw either country into direct participation in the conflicts such as by offering to send fighters," said Marvin Weinbaum, director of Afghanistan and Pakistan studies at the Middle East Institute think tank in Washington.

Pakistan and the Taliban both directly blamed Israel for Haniyeh's assassination, which Tehran has also blamed on its archenemy.

Islamabad denounced the killing as an act of "terrorism," and hundreds of supporters of a Pakistan Islamist party held a symbolic funeral for Haniyeh near Islamabad on July 31.

'Making Life Harder For Afghans'

Iran is on friendly terms with the Taliban. Tehran is also the biggest trading partner of the cash-strapped and internationally unrecognized Taliban-led government. Kabul is dependent on Iranian ports for most of its imports and exports amid tensions with neighboring Pakistan.

The Islamic republic is also home to around 4 million Afghan migrants and refugees. The remittances they send back home keep many impoverished families afloat in Afghanistan, which has grappled with an economic crisis since the Taliban takeover in 2021.

Graeme Smith, a senior Afghanistan analyst at the Brussels-based International Crisis Group, said rising tensions in the Middle East "could have destabilizing consequences for the fragile situation in Afghanistan."

Smith said the risk is that a conflict involving Iran will harden the country's borders with Afghanistan, "making life harder for Afghans."

He said Afghanistan's humanitarian crisis, the largest in the world, could worsen if its borders with Iran are closed.

"The exit route from that crisis depends on renewed trade across the region," he said. "[But it] requires borders opening to the flow of goods and labor."

Pakistan Not To Become 'Directly Involved'

Hundreds of thousands of Afghans and millions of Pakistanis work as laborers and traders in the oil-rich Arab Gulf countries.

A potential regional war could disrupt the flow of Afghan and Pakistani migrant workers heading to the Gulf. That would deal a major blow to Afghanistan and Pakistan, both of which are both heavily dependent on remittances sent from abroad.

In Pakistan, some political parties and the media have called for Islamabad to take a more hard-line approach to Israel, which is not formally recognized by the South Asian country.

But Weinbaum said the "general feeling among [Pakistani] policymakers is that the country has enough security concerns of its own not to become directly involved."

Faced with rising militant attacks in the northwestern province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the southwestern province of Balochistan, which borders Iran and Afghanistan, Islamabad's choices are limited.

"There are also worries about an American reaction if Pakistan makes any military commitments [to Iran]," Weinbaum said.

Afghanistan and Pakistan are home to millions of Shi'ite Muslims. And Iran, a Shi'a-majority country, could look to Shi'ite communities living in its eastern neighbors for recruits in the event of a war.

During the Syrian civil war, Iran recruited, trained, and armed thousands of Shi'ite fighters from Afghanistan and Pakistan to fight. Many of those fighters who survived have returned home as the war has died down.

Welcome back to the China In Eurasia briefing, an RFE/RL newsletter tracking China's resurgent influence from Eastern Europe to Central Asia. To subscribe, click here.

I'm RFE/RL correspondent Reid Standish and here's what I'm following right now.

Harvesting Afghanistan's Mineral Wealth

After 16 years of delays, Chinese engineers and the Taliban government officially started work at Mes Aynak, a massive project in Afghanistan to mine the world's second-largest deposit of copper, my colleagues at RFE/RL's Radio Azadi reported.

Finding Perspective: At the July 24 event, Taliban officials along with Chinese businessmen and diplomats carried out a ribbon-cutting ceremony as work began on the construction of a road to the mining site.

A $3 billion deal signed in 2008 with the previous Afghan government gave the Chinese state-owned China Metallurgical Group Corporation (MCC) a 30-year mining concession, but combat between NATO-led troops and Taliban insurgents at the time delayed the project from moving forward.

But with violence waning since the Taliban's 2021 takeover, the cash-strapped Taliban-installed government is eager to exploit the country's vast and lucrative mineral deposits.

Since it seized power, the Taliban has faced the task of undertaking the reconstruction and development of a country devastated by decades of war. At the same time, officials have also found their economy suffocated by Western sanctions and are dealing with international isolation that has cut them off from receiving financial support.

China has been an exception for the Taliban government, with Beijing vowing to pursue deeper cooperation shortly after the group took control of Kabul, and Chinese companies have had an eye on exploiting Afghanistan's extensive resource wealth, signing a series of deals to secure the rights to oil and gas fields and rare-earth metal deposits.

What Comes Next?: Taliban officials said it would likely be at least two years before the first copper was extracted by MCC.

According to a Brookings Institute report, Afghanistan sits on some 2.3 billion metric tons of iron ore and 1.4 million metric tons of rare-earth minerals, and the U.S. Geological Survey has calculated that the country is sitting on $1 trillion in untapped minerals, such as iron, gold, and lithium -- an essential but scarce component in rechargeable batteries and other technologies.

Mes Aynak is one of the most attractive offerings for Chinese firms. The deposit is estimated to contain 11.5 million tons of copper ore, which is vital for electronics components and is surging in value due to its use in growing markets related to electric vehicles, renewable energy, and data centers.

Why It Matters: The ground breaking is a sign that Chinese resource ventures are moving forward in the country after decades of delays, but security concerns are still paramount.

Further developing the mine and turning a profit from it will require a substantially larger footprint of Chinese workers inside Afghanistan, and there are lingering questions about whether the Taliban can offer protection, especially amid Islamic State-Khorasan’s expanding profile.

Chinese workers have increasingly become a target of attacks in the region by various militant groups.

In neighboring Pakistan, there have been growing attacks on Chinese citizens, including a suicide attack that killed five Chinese engineers in March and a 2021 bombing that killed 13 people, including nine Chinese workers, at a dam project.

In Afghanistan, at least five Chinese nationals were wounded when gunmen stormed a Kabul hotel popular with Beijing businessmen in 2022.

Three More Stories From Eurasia

1. Kuleba's China Trip

Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba wrapped up a three-day trip to China and Hong Kong, where he met with his Chinese counterpart, Wang Yi.

Here’s what happened:

The Details: While meeting with Wang in Guangzhou, Kuleba said that Ukraine remains ready to hold talks with Russia provided Moscow proves it's ready to negotiate in “good faith,” but that Kyiv has yet to see such inclination from the Kremlin.

He then met with Guangdong Governor Wang Weizhong and regional officials, where he encouraged them “to consider investment and business prospects and humanitarian needs.”

“There is great demand for construction, industrial recovery, renewable energy, and other areas. So now is a good time to deepen trade ties,” Kuleba said.

Ukraine’s top diplomat then went to Hong Kong and met with Chief Executive John Lee where he asked him “to take measures to prevent Russia from using Hong Kong to circumvent restrictive measures introduced for Russian aggression against Ukraine.”

The next day after Wang’s meeting with Kuleba, the Chinese official met with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov on the sidelines of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) talks in Laos where they praised their close ties and discussed implementing “a new security architecture” in Eurasia.

2. Hearts, Minds, And Dirty Air

The massive copper-mining complex in eastern Serbia run by China’s state-owned Zijin Mining Group is facing fresh pushback from nearby residents over pollution concerns, my colleague from RFE/RL’s Balkan Service, Branko Pesic, reports.

What You Need To Know: Zijin took over Bor’s massive copper-mining and smelting complex in 2018 and has grappled with concerns about its environmental impact and the health of nearby residents, including fines and a temporary work-stop order.

But the Chinese mining venture, which has poured billions into the project, has been praised by the Serbian government as a much-needed job creating investment.

Environmental groups have accused Serbian authorities of turning a blind eye to pollution and health concerns stemming from the copper mine, which is boosting its output and expanding operations rapidly as value for the metal rises amid increased demand for the role it plays in the global energy transition away from fossil fuels.

Branko spoke with locals and activists who say that pollution, especially from some carcinogenic heavy metals, is getting worse, despite Zijin’s claims. Read his full report here.

3. A China And Russia Flyby Of Alaska

The United States and Canada scrambled fighter jets on July 24 after two Russian and two Chinese military planes were tracked in international airspace close to Alaska.

What It Means: The North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) said that it “detected, tracked, and intercepted two Russian Tu-95 and two PRC H-6 military aircraft operating in the Alaska Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ).”

The “identification zone” is a stretch of international airspace that acts as a buffer zone where U.S. and Canadian national airspace ends. All aircraft entering the ADIZ require identification for national security reasons.

The presence of the Russian and Chinese planes was not seen as a threat, and intercepts of Russian planes are relatively common in the area.

But China and Russia together represent a newer development. While the two countries have carried out several joint patrols in the past, this incident was the first one that brought together bombers from both countries in the north Pacific area.

Earlier in July, the Chinese and Russian navies conducted their fourth joint sea patrols in the western and northern Pacific.

Across The Supercontinent

Anaklia Ruling: In May, the Georgian government awarded a contract to a consortium of Chinese companies to build a new deep-sea port in Anaklia on the country’s Black Sea coast.

But a previous bid to build the strategic port that was canceled by the government after years of political jostling had spent years waiting for a ruling by an international arbitration court, which ruled on July 29 in Tbilisi’s favor. The move removes a legal obstacle to the project, RFE/RL’s Georgian Service reports.

Election Watch: The U.S. Director of National Intelligence said “foreign actors” are conducting and planning "influence operations" targeting the November elections in the United States using increasingly refined tactics “to better hide their hand.”

Il Ripristino: After pulling her country out of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni made her first trip to Beijing, where she met with Chinese leader Xi Jinping.

The trip is seen as part of a reset effort by Rome after criticizing the Chinese infrastructure project. During her visit, Meloni called China an "important interlocutor" in managing global tensions.

Harris’s Foreign Policy: My colleague Margot Buff and I made a short video looking at what U.S. foreign policy might look like under a Kamala Harris presidency, with a particular focus on Russia and China. Watch it here.

One Thing To Watch

The Summer Olympics in Paris kicked off on July 26, and a doping scandal involving Chinese swimmers and the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) is under way in the background.

Three different incidents have been reported over the last several months in which the Chinese have blamed food contamination for positive drug tests. WADA accepted the results of the Chinese investigations and an independent follow-up was carried out. The doping watchdog organization then kept the matter secret until reporting made the incidents public.

Now, a bipartisan group of U.S. lawmakers has introduced a bill that could cut future U.S. funding for the global sports anti-doping system unless sweeping reforms are made.

That’s all from me for now. Don’t forget to send me any questions, comments, or tips that you might have.

Until next time,

Reid Standish

If you enjoyed this briefing and don't want to miss the next edition, subscribe here. It will be sent to your inbox every Wednesday.