Aishwarya Rai and Abhishek Bachchan have been married for 17 years. This wedding was one of the most high-profile weddings in Bollywood. Abhishek and Aishwarya, son of Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan, fell in love on the sets of Mani Ratnam's film "Guru". The film was released in January 2007 and three months later, in April 2007, the two got married. After marriage, Aishwarya became the "Bachchan bahu".

Life after marriage

In an interview in 2008, when Aishwarya was asked about her opinion on being called "Bachchan bahu", she said that the question has been dragged too much into her life. She said that she is a simple girl who is Aishwarya Rai and is married to Abhishek Bachchan. Her name is the same and there has been no major change in it.

importance of family

Aishwarya also said that the members of the Bachchan family are recognised on public platforms and they deserve it. She talked about respecting the name and the functioning of the family and said that they all work hard to maintain the dignity of the name. But at the end of the day, they are a family and Abhishek and Aishwarya love each other.

Distance from daughter Aaradhya and family

Aishwarya and Abhishek have a daughter named Aaradhya. Recently, there have been reports of Aishwarya's rift with the Bachchan family. According to media reports, Aishwarya is living separately with her daughter Aaradhya and she does not talk to the Bachchan family.

Rumours of a rift

On many occasions, there have been signs of rift between Aishwarya and the Bachchan family. Recently, at the wedding of Anant Ambani and Radhika Merchant, Aishwarya did not attend the Bachchan family but with her daughter. During this time, she did not even get photographed with her in-laws. After this, the rumors of Aishwarya and Abhishek's divorce intensified. Aishwarya Rai and Abhishek Bachchan's marriage was one of the most talked about marriages in Bollywood. There have been ups and downs in their relationship, but their fans always like to see them together. Hopefully this beautiful couple will remain happy in their life and solve all the problems.

The Shift in Banking Jobs: How Digitalization is Changing the Financial Sector

Little Girl's Joyride in Driverless Car Sparks Internet Debate: Safety vs. Innovation