Abhishek Bachchan and Aishwarya Rai Bachchan have been married for nearly 16 years. They also have a daughter named Aaradhya. Aishwarya and Abhishek are one of the most beloved celebrity couples in Bollywood and have openly expressed their love for one another during media interactions. However, there was a time when Abhishek felt like Aishwarya would not romance him.

Abhishek Bachchan was quoted in Cosmopolitan as saying, “I was dreading this flight to Mauritius. We were going to shoot the title song Kuch Na Kaho. I said oh God please don’t let me sit next to her… She was right next to me and I said this is it, I am finished. The woman sleeps like a Miss World as well, I mean she sleeps perfectly (imitates her posture)… and she is out. I couldn’t sleep the entire flight because I was petrified that she was going to wake up in the middle of the night for some water and I was going to be like (imitates himself) {laughs}… She is never going to want to romance me after that in the song. The next time she sees me like in a romantic scene she is going to see this troll sleeping next to her!”

Abhishek and Aishwarya have starred together in multiple movies such as Dhoom 2 (2006), Guru (2007) and Raavan (2010), among others. They dated for a brief period before tying the knot. Their chemistry is greatly appreciated by their fans, both on-screen and off-screen. The couple celebrated their wedding anniversary last month and Aishwarya dropped a sweet family photo on Instagram to mark the occasion.

Talking about their marriage, the couple was once asked how often they fight. Aishwarya was quick to reply and told Vogue India in July 2010, “Oh, every day.” However, Abhishek clarified, “But they’re more like disagreements, not fights. They’re not serious, they’re healthy. It’d be really boring otherwise.”

Abhishek also said he is always the first one to apologise and make up. “Women don’t make up! But we have a rule— we don’t sleep on a fight. And in defence of all men, I want to tell you, half the time the reason we give in and say sorry is because we’re just so sleepy and want to go to bed! Besides, women are the superior race, and they’re always right. The sooner men accept that, the better. It doesn’t matter what you say, even if you have concrete proof, in their world, it’s futile, it makes no sense,” he said.