Aishwarya Rai Bachchan and Abhishek Bachchan got married on April 20, 2007. Their bond started as friends, and with time, their friendship culminated in a romantic relationship. Before getting married, the duo worked together in movies like Dhaai Akshar Prem Ke, Kuch Naa Kaho, Umrao Jaan, and Guru. The couple has been married for 17 years and has a daughter, Aaradhya.

For all the TV News and Entertainment News updates, follow BollywoodLife on WhatsApp.

On July 12, Aishwarya and Abhishek grabbed headlines after the duo attended Anant Ambani and Radhika Merchant's wedding in Mumbai. What shocked a lot of people is that the duo didn't pose for pictures together. Abhishek arrived at the venue with his parents, Amitabh and Jaya Bachchan, as well as his sister Shweta and her children, Agastya and Navya. The PS 2 actress made an entry with her daughter, Aaradhya Bachchan.

Seeing how Abhishek Bachchan and Aishwarya Rai Bachchan didn't pose for pictures together led to speculation that there's tension going on between the couple. So far, these are just rumours. The duo is quite private about their married life. However, in an old interview, the Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam actress opened up about her married life with Abhishek.

Here's a video of Aishwarya Rai Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan

In an interview with Filmfare in 2016, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan was asked about her married life with Junior B. The couple had then completed nine years of marital bliss. Aishwarya revealed that the journey has been like a blink of an eye. The blue-eyed beauty responded that it's wonderful that time is passing quickly and they're not feeling the passing of the years, which is a positive sign.

In the same interview, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan was asked if her marriage to Abhishek Bachchan had changed her. The Devdas actress stated that life constantly evolves, and that change is natural. Aishwarya said that a person has to be conscious of a change in their life. One cannot just sail through everything and drift along; if they do so, they're not investing, experiencing, or giving to it and taking it back. stressed the importance of being mindful and actively participating in each phase of life, including relationships with family, friends, and professionals. Aishwarya highlighted that marriage isn't just about two individuals coming together but also about uniting two families. She called them strong influences.

"We're equally aware and conscious of embracing each other’s side, and today we’re one. Two people who marry and decide to spend their life together should have that kind of exchange. So I’ve chosen to lean on exchange as opposed to change," said Aishwarya Rai Bachchan in the interview.

Stay tuned to BollywoodLife for the latest scoops and updates from Bollywood, Hollywood, South, TV and Web-Series.