Expands supply chain product footprint to include demand planning and forecasting, replenishment

Atlanta — September 1, 2005 — Supply chain solutions provider Manhattan Associates Inc. announced that is has completed the acquisition of Evant Inc., a provider of supply chain planning and replenishment solutions.

Privately held and based in San Francisco and Atlanta, Evant provides solutions to more than 60 companies in the retail, manufacturing and wholesale distribution industries, including many that are joint Manhattan Associates clients. Under the terms of the agreement, Manhattan Associates will pay approximately $50 million in cash for the company.

Initially the company expected the transaction to close on September 30. With the transaction now closed, some of the transition costs expected to be recognized in the fourth quarter will now be recognized in Manhattan Associates' third quarter.

Manhattan Associates said the Evant acquisition extends its solution footprint beyond its current supply chain execution position. This combination of planning, optimization and execution solutions will allow Manhattan Associates to provide a complete footprint for supply chain management.

Moreover, the acquisition provides the existing Evant customer base the use of Manhattan Associates' suite of Integrated Logistics Solutions, which includes Distributed Order Management, Warehouse Management, Transportation Management, Trading Partner Management, Reverse Logistics Management and RFID [radio frequency identification] in a Box.

"We believe the extension into supply chain planning and replenishment is a natural evolution for Manhattan Associates. We know from experience with our joint customers, that companies with the best supply chains in the world are looking for a single business partner to provide solutions and expertise for integrating their supply and demand networks," said Pete Sinisgalli, president and CEO of Manhattan Associates. "The combination of our solutions represents an important step in our plan to continue to deliver superior value to our customers and shareholders."