Effective Date: May 27, 2021

INTRODUCTION

Manhattan Associates, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, “Manhattan Associates”) respects your privacy and is committed to complying with this privacy policy (“Privacy Policy”), which describes what information we collect about you, including how we collect it, how we use it, with whom we may share it and what choices you have regarding our use of your information. This Privacy Policy applies to information collected on:

Our website https://www.manh.com (the “Website”);

Any current or future Manhattan mobile applications associated with our Website or products including but not limited to Manhattan TMS Mobile, Manhattan TM Carrier and Manhattan SCALE Active (the “Mobile Application”);

Any interfacing features including use of devices (for example RF equipment or robotic interfaces);

Social networks and social network “tabs”; and

Other online or wireless offerings that we control that post a link to this Privacy Policy, whether accessed via computer, mobile device or other technology or any associated content, material, or functionality contained on the Website, Software and/or associated Mobile Application (collectively the “System”).

By accessing and using the System, or any part thereof, you agree that you have read and understand this Privacy Policy, and that in exchange for access to the System, you accept and consent to the privacy practices (and any uses and disclosures of information about you) that are described in this Privacy Policy.

CHANGES TO OUR PRIVACY POLICY

We may change this Privacy Policy at any time and from time to time. The most recent version of the Privacy Policy is reflected by the effective date located at the top of this Privacy Policy. All such updates and amendments are effective immediately upon posting a revised version of this Privacy Policy on the Website and the Mobile Applications. You should view this Privacy Policy often to stay informed of changes that may affect you, as your continued use of the System signifies your continuing consent to be bound by this Privacy Policy. We expressly reserve the right to make any changes to this Privacy Policy at any time, without prior notice to you. This Privacy Policy is our notice to you and does not constitute a contract between you and us.

WHAT TYPE OF INFORMATION DO WE COLLECT?

We may collect certain identifying information from or about you in connection with your use of, or your submissions to, the System (collectively, the “Collected Information”). Collected Information includes, but is not limited to information:

by which you may be personally identified, including but not limited to first and last name, date of birth, a physical address, phone number or email address;

about your internet connection, the you use to access our Mobile Application, and usage details;

collected automatically which may include usage details, IP addresses, and information collected through cookies, web beacons, and other tracking technologies.

that you provide by filling in forms on our Website. This includes information provided at the time of registering on our Website or requesting information through our Website. We may also ask you for information when you report a problem with our Website.

provided directly by you when completing forms on our Website. This includes information provided at the time of registering on our Website or requesting information through our Website. We may also ask you for information when you report a problem with our Website.

about a device you use, such as browser, device type, operating system, the presence or use of Mobile Applications, screen resolution, and the preferred language;

certain location or geolocation information you provide directly or through automated means, if you choose to enable location based services from your device or one of our Mobile Applications; and

behavioral data of the internet connected computer or device you use when interacting with the sites, such as advertisements clicked or viewed, sites and content areas, date and time of activities or the web search used to locate and navigate to a site.

Manhattan Associates uses the Collected Information to provide the services that are available via the Website and Mobile Applications. In order to continuously improve your service and tailor our subsequent communications to you, we may also ask you to provide us with additional information regarding your demographics, comments, professional interests, and contact preferences.

HOW DO WE USE THE INFORMATION THAT WE COLLECT?

We may collect and use the Collected Information for the following business purposes:

to operate the System, including to provide certain services and improve the user experience;

to conduct research and analysis to maintain, protect, develop, and improve the System;

to allow you to access limited-entry areas of our Website as may be appropriate

to facilitate and otherwise address certain inquiries or requests regarding the System from Manhattan Associates.

to ensure compliance with any Manhattan Associates policies and any applicable law, regulation or order.

If you do not want us to use your information in this way, please do not provide us with your information.

Except as set forth in this Privacy Policy, Manhattan Associates will not use, disclose, or transfer your Collected Information unless:

you expressly authorize Manhattan Associates to do so,

it is necessary in order to provide the System,

it is necessary to protect the confidentiality or security of your records,

it is necessary to comply with law enforcement, governmental mandate, or other legal requirement, if appropriate, for your protection or in connection with an investigation or prosecution of possible unlawful activity; or

it is otherwise necessary for Manhattan Associates to disclose it as required or permitted by law.

WITH WHOM DO WE SHARE INFORMATION THAT WE COLLECT?

We do not sell, rent, or lease our user lists or the identity of individual users to third parties. However, Manhattan Associates may use and disclose certain aggregated, anonymized information, such as System usage data, to our trusted business partners. Such information may also be shared with other users or the general public for advertising, informational, or comparison purposes. However, such information shall not be personally identifiable to any user.

For marketing purposes, we may share your information with our business partners. We or our business partners may contact you by mail, telephone, fax, email or other electronic messaging service with offers of goods and services or information that may be of interest to you about supply chain sector services, materials, news or training. By providing us with your fax number, telephone numbers, email or mailing address you consent to being contacted by these methods for these purposes. If you do not wish to receive such information from us or our business partners, please contact us using the details provided below any time. No further action is necessary if you have previously indicated to us that you do not want to receive such marketing material.

Because Manhattan Associates is a global company, your personal information may be shared with other Manhattan Associates business units around the world. They will protect your personal information in accordance with this Privacy Policy.

We may disclose personal information that we collect or you provide as described in this privacy policy:

To our subsidiaries and affiliates.

To contractors, service providers and other third parties we use to support our business [and who are bound by contractual obligations to keep personal information confidential and use it only for the purposes for which we disclose it to them].

To a buyer or other successor in the event of a merger, divestiture, restructuring, reorganization, dissolution or other sale or transfer of some or all of Manhattan Associates’ assets, in which personal information held by Manhattan Associates about our Website users is among the assets transferred.

To fulfill the purpose for which you provide it.

For any other purpose disclosed by us when you provide the information.

With your consent.

We may also disclose Collected Information if we become subject to a subpoena or court order, or if we are otherwise legally required to disclose information. We may also use and disclose Collected Information to establish or exercise our legal rights, to enforce the Terms of Use, to assert and defend against legal claims, or if we believe such disclosure is necessary to investigate, prevent, or take other action regarding actual or suspected illegal or fraudulent activities or potential threats to the physical safety or well-being of any person.

COOKIES AND SIMILAR TECHNOLOGY

Manhattan Associates may use Cookies and similar technologies to recognize you and/or your device(s) on, off and across different services and devices.

The technologies we use for this automatic data collection may include:

Cookies (or browser cookies). A cookie is a small file placed on the hard drive of your computer.

Web Beacons. Pages of our Website may contain small electronic files known as web beacons (also referred to as clear gifs. pixel tags and single-pixel gifs) that permit the Company, for example, to count users who have visited those pages and for other related website statistics (for example, recording the popularity of certain website content and verifying system and server integrity).

When do we use cookies and similar technologies?

The information we collect automatically helps us to improve our Website and to deliver a better and more personalized service, including by enabling us to:

Estimate our audience size and usage patterns.

Store information about your preferences, allowing us to customize our Website on our products and services according to your individual interests.

Speed up your searches.

Recognize you when you return to our Website.

How can you manage your cookie preferences?

You may refuse to accept browser cookies by activating the appropriate setting on your browser. However, if you select this setting you may be unable to access certain parts of our Website. Unless you have adjusted your browser setting so that it will refuse cookies, our system will issue cookies when you direct your browser to our Website. However, setting your browser to reject cookies may, in certain instances, prevent you from taking full advantage of our Website and its capabilities, or cause some features to function improperly or more slowly.

CORRESPONDENCE

We appreciate your questions and comments about the System and welcome your messages at our “Contact Us” page, which you can find at https://www.manh.com/contact-us. If you correspond with Manhattan Associates through the System or via email, the Collected Information may include the content of, and metadata regarding, any correspondence you may have with us. We may share your messages with those within our organization who are most capable of addressing the issues contained in your message. We may archive your message for a certain period of time or discard it.

HOW CAN I OPT-OUT OF PROMOTIONAL CORRESPONDENCE?

We may send you emails with promotional offers only if you opt-in to receiving such emails. If you would no longer like to receive information, newsletters or other promotional messages from us, please click the link at the bottom of any such email you receive from us and follow the instructions to change your email preferences. Your email address will be removed from our marketing list. Please allow us a reasonable period of time in order to satisfy your request, as some promotions may already be in process.

JOB APPLICANTS.

Any personal information you provide us when applying for a career position with our Manhattan Associates will be used solely to consider and act upon your application. We may retain your personal information for a period of time, but only for as long as necessary for such purposes. We may disclose your personal information to our agents for the purpose of evaluating your qualifications for the particular position you applied for, or other available positions. We may also disclose your personal information to third parties hired by us to collect, maintain, and analyze candidates for career positions. You may elect to have your information deleted from our database by contacting us at dataprotection@manh.com

WHAT CHOICES DO YOU HAVE?

When submitting information, corresponding, making requests for information, and otherwise interacting with Manhattan Associates and its representatives through or in connection with the System, you choose what information to supply or submit, whether you wish to receive further information, and how you may be contacted. Please take care to share only such information as is needed or that you believe is appropriate. Any promotional email we send to you will contain a link which will allow you to opt out of receiving any further correspondence.

HOW DO WE PROTECT INFORMATION COLLECTED ABOUT YOU?

Manhattan Associates takes commercially reasonable measures to secure and protect information transmitted via or stored on the System. Nevertheless, no security system is impenetrable. We cannot guarantee that information that users of the System may happen to transmit or otherwise supply will be totally secure. You agree to immediately notify us of any breach of System's security, this Privacy Policy, or the Terms of Use of which you become aware.

LINKED WEBSITES

For your convenience, some hyperlinks may be posted on the System that link to other websites not under our control. We are not responsible for, and this Privacy Policy does not apply to, the privacy practices of those sites or of any companies that we do not own or control. We cannot be responsible for the privacy practices of any such websites or pages not under our control and we do not endorse any of these websites or pages, the services or products described or offered on such sites or pages, or any of the content contained on those sites or pages. We encourage you to seek out and read the privacy policy of each website that you visit. In addition, should you happen to initiate a transaction on a website that our System links to, even if you reached that site through the System, the information that you submit to complete that transaction becomes subject to the privacy practices of the operator of that linked website. You should read that website's privacy policies to understand how personal information that is collected about you is used and protected.

USER-PROVIDED CONTENT

Any information, communications, or material of any type or nature that you submit to the Website or any System by e-mail, posting, messaging, uploading, downloading, or otherwise (collectively, a “Submission”) is done at your own risk and without any expectation of privacy. We cannot control the actions of other users of the System and we are therefore not responsible for any Submissions contained on the Website. By visiting any of our pages that are contained on the Website, you are representing and warranting to us that you have reviewed this Privacy Policy and the Terms of Use and that you will abide by all such provisions contained therein.

Additionally, in the event that we offer a message board or any other interactive or social-type feature on the Website, please be aware that these areas may allow you to post, and share with other users, certain messages, content, or other information. We encourage you to be wary of giving out any personal information, or any personal information of others to which you may have access, in such forums. The information you post can be collected and used by other people. We cannot guarantee the privacy and safety of these areas and are therefore not responsible for any information you choose to post. Your use of these features is fully at your own risk.

SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS AND WEBSITES

Any Submission that you submit to any of our pages contained on a social media platform or website by e-mail, posting, messaging, uploading, downloading, or otherwise is done at your own risk and without any expectation of privacy. We cannot control the actions of other users of a social media platform and we are therefore not responsible for any Submissions contained on a social media platform or website. By visiting any of our pages that are contained on any social media platform or website, you are representing and warranting to us that you have reviewed the applicable privacy policy and terms of use of such website or social media platform and that you will abide by all such provisions contained therein.

CHILDREN

The System is intended for a general audience and is not intended for use or view by children under 13 years of age without parental consent, and we do not knowingly collect information about children or sell products to children. Consistent with the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act, we will not knowingly collect any information from children under the age of 13. If you are under the age of 13, you must ask your parent or guardian to assist you in using the System.

WHOM CAN YOU CONTACT FOR MORE INFORMATION?