The Stephen Low Company is pleased to announce the development of a new IMAX 3D motion picture project focused on the Indianapolis 500 Mile Race, which takes place annually at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, and the evolution of motorsports.

The 3D film will be directed by giant-screen filmmaker Stephen Low and produced and distributed by The Stephen Low Company in association with Ralph Hansen of Pegasus Marketing Group. Indianapolis Motor Speedway officials endorse the venture and will consult on the content of the film and companion education outreach program, and also provide access to the world-famous racing facility for filming.

The production will be an independent documentary celebrating the auto racing experience and its historical and enduring connection to the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and Indianapolis 500. The Speedway was constructed in 1909, and the first “500” took place on May 30, 1911.

Low also produced and directed the critically-acclaimed 1997 IMAX film “Super Speedway,” featuring legendary IndyCar drivers Mario and Michael Andretti.

Anticipated for release in October 2011, plans call for the film to be distributed worldwide to IMAX theatres (3D, 2D and Dome).The motion picture will be filmed at the Speedway and related story locations, capturing unique 3D track action and highlight key moments in the track’s remarkable 102-year history and 100th anniversary of the first Indianapolis 500.

“This project will reach and attract new audiences to IMS and to motorsports, and create an important link to museums, science centers and schools by providing a meaningful science and technology learning experience,” said Jeff Belskus, Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation president and CEO. “The film will create a memorable and lasting tribute to ‘The Racing Capital of the World’ and its many contributions to society. The planned timing of its release will provide a fitting conclusion to our 100th anniversary celebrations.”

The project is to be funded by producer investment and major corporate sponsorships. Participating sponsors will benefit from worldwide brand presence on the film credits and in the content and marketing of the film, as well as through association with the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, the Indianapolis 500, the racing community and prestigious exhibiting museums and science centers worldwide.

The Stephen Low Company is a Montreal-based producer of the IMAX Experience and leading 3D entertainment and a distributor to IMAX theaters and other giant screen theatres worldwide. Award-winning filmmaker Stephen Low is the director of more than fifteen giant screen films including the just released “Legends of Flight (3D)” and “The Ultimate Wave (3D),” as well as “Across the Sea of Time (3D),” “Mark Twain's America (3D),” “Beavers,” “Titanica,” “Fighter Pilot” and the giant screen racing classic “Super Speedway (1997),” among others.

***

2011 Indy 500 tickets: Fans can reorder and apply for tickets to the 2011 Indianapolis 500, scheduled for Sunday, May 29, online at www.imstix.com.

For more information, call the IMS ticket office at (317) 492-6700 or (800) 822-INDY outside the Indianapolis area or visit the ticket office at the IMS Administration Building at the corner of Georgetown Road and 16th Street. Ticket office and phone hours are 8 a.m.-5 p.m. (ET) Monday-Friday.