The BBC didn’t understand its 1990s time-travel sitcom, Goodnight Sweetheart. Not at first, anyway. The show’s creators, Laurence Marks and Maurice Gran pitched it to a BBC head of comedy as “the story of a man who’s in love with two women – one of whom is probably eighty but might be dead.” To which the BBC man was forced to admit, “Look, I just don’t understand it… Is it going to be funny?” When Marks and Gran assured him that Goodnight Sweetheart would indeed be funny, he said. “Alright, do six.’”

Marks and Gran – who also wrote The New Statesman and Birds of a Feather – admit they were having a bit of fun at the expense of the comedy chief. “Because we knew the BBC had no choice but to pay us to write a script – that was the nature of our deal – I decided to be a little bit cheeky,” says Gran, talking via Zoom alongside Marks, his longtime writing partner.

The BBC’s initial confusion isn’t surprising. Thirty years on, Goodnight Sweetheart is still a strange idea: Nicholas Lyndhurst as a time-travelling adulterer – and eventually a bigamist – who flits between his wife in the present day and his barmaid mistress in the Blitz-era East End. “The strangest idea in television history, I think,” admits Marks.

Lyndhurst is now back on TV screens, playing a professor in the rebooted Frasier for Paramount +. The leftfield casting prompted reactions along the lines of: “Bonnet de douche! Rodders from Only Fools and Horses in Frasier?” Indeed, Lyndhurst has never quite escaped 42-carat plonker Rodney Trotter. Goodnight Sweetheart, however, was his biggest success away from Nelson Mandela House. It peaked with an audience of 13.5 million viewers and ran for 59 episodes – only five episodes short of the Trotter clan.

The idea for Goodnight Sweetheart came from an off-the-cuff remark. At the time, Marks and Gran were writing their romantic comedy drama, Love Hurts, which starred Adam Faith and Zoë Wanamaker. “We were writing a scene about characters meeting in the East End,” recalls Gran. “And Laurence said in a fey way, ‘Do you know there are some streets in the East End that haven’t really changed since the Blitz.’ And I said, ‘That’s a series.’”

That developed into the story of TV repairman Gary Sparrow. Downtrodden by the mediocrity of his marriage to wannabe high-flyer, Yvonne (Michelle Holmes), he chances upon a time portal in an East End alleyway, which transports him back to 1940. Stumbling into the Royal Oak – a real pub on Columbia Rd in Bethnal Green – Gary falls for Phoebe (Dervla Kirwan), whose husband is away fighting. Back in 1993, Gary’s pal Ron (Victor McGuire) helps facilitate Gary’s double life by printing period money and documents, such as rationing books.

As well as embarking on an untraceable, impossible-to-be-caught-out affair (joked about in the show as every man’s dream scenario) Gary pretends he’s a musician with American Embassy contacts, warning them about incoming air raids and wooing Phoebe with bananas and chocolate. He later claims to be a secret agent.

Eventually, he moves up to the West End, marries Phoebe, and has a son – who’s actually older than he is – while maintaining his rocky marriage in the 1990s. In a strange coincidence, this mirrored Lyndhurst’s own biography: his father had walked out on his mother for another woman when he was eight, starting another family. This desertion left them “poverty stricken,” he would later recall.

Goodnight Sweetheart, though, played Sparrow’s adultery for laughs. In one running gag – a bit of amusing wish fulfilment – Gary impresses the wartime Londoners by playing pop hits on the piano, most notably songs by The Beatles, and passes them off as his own compositions.

As far as Marks and Gran were concerned, Nicholas Lyndhurst was the only choice for Gary Sparrow. “As soon as we had the idea, we knew there was only one person who could play it,” says Gran. “Who could play an adulterer and retain the audience’s sympathy?”

Marks and Gran didn’t know Lyndhurst but they happened to sit on a table with Lyndhurst’s agent the night they won a Bafta for writing Love Hurts. “We said we’ve got something we’d like to talk with Nick about,” recalls Marks. “We were sitting there with our BAFTA on the table – she’s not going to say no! If Nick had said he didn’t really like it, I think we would have discarded the idea.”

The first episode of Goodnight Sweetheart aired on November 18 1993. Its popularity peaked during its second and third series – which aired in 1995 and 1996 respectively – when it regularly attracted more than 12 million viewers. It ultimately ran for an impressive six series, ending in 1999, when Gary finds himself trapped in 1945 – on VE Day, no less. They had always intended to finish the series with the end of the war.

Interestingly, the show followed real events. Marks and Gran picked up a book at the Blitz Museum and – like Gary Sparrow – followed the dates of real air raids. In a 1995 Christmas special, Gary tries to warn the Americans about Pearl Harbor and – across various episodes – rubs shoulders with real-life figures that include Winston Churchill, Guy Burgess, George Formby, Noël Coward, Trevor Howard, and Robert Maxwell.

There are odd meta elements to Goodnight Sweetheart, which occasionally crosses the boundaries of reality as well as time. In the opening titles, Gary walks past a cinema and sees himself on a 1940s-style movie poster – an oddly metaphysical touch for what was essentially a primetime studio sitcom. Elsewhere, Gary meets Captain Mainwaring and Sergeant Wilson from Dad’s Army – presented as real people. Goodnight Sweetheart also has some fun playing around with time travel. In the first series, the closest he gets to being caught out is when Yvonne sees him (or what she thinks is a dead ringer of him) in an old 1940s newsreel.

Goodnight Sweetheart isn’t just not a strange concept but an unusually structured sitcom. Rather than a standard studio sitcom – in which the status quo traditionally resets at the end of each episode – Goodnight Sweetheart plays out like a studio drama. The characters and story develop as the episodes progress. Watched now, the ongoing story has dated better than the gags.

The show was a big enough success that there was talk of a US version. “Which was impossible because they didn’t have a war there,” says Marks. Far more intriguing was the prospect of making a German version. “We were asked about doing it in Germany – Nazi Germany,” says Marks. “We went to Berlin and realised the Germans had no sense of humour… But it was a very interesting project – that a Gary was moving between Berlin today and a really dangerous Berlin during the war.”

As with most things science fiction, Goodnight Sweetheart has a cult-like fandom. The fans, Marks explains, call themselves “sweeties”. Gran was once mobbed while doing an interview for a Radio 2 show. “As I approached Broadcasting House there were about 30 people with cameras and autograph books,” he says. “I was thinking, I wonder who’s on the show that attracted all these people? It turned out it was me! They were Goodnight Sweetheart fans!”

Marks and Gran joke that Goodnight Sweetheart has inspired the likes of Life on Mars and Richard Curtis’s world-without-the-Beatles film, Yesterday. “Not that we’re bitter,” laughs Gran.

Goodnight Sweetheart did return for a one-off special in 2016, as part of a celebratory sitcom season on the BBC. Gary is stuck in the past – now 1962 – and returns to modern day. He’s stunned by how things have changed. “Gary had never seen a selfie stick or a telephone box turned into a defibrillator,” says Gran.

“They did approach Paul McCartney to appear,” says Paul Burton. “Because of scheduling they couldn’t make it work. But there was going to be a scene where McCartney said, ‘Come on, you’ve been ripping off my songs!’”

Marks and Gran were anticipating a new full series, but – according to the story they heard – there was a negative industry reaction to the BBC resurrecting old sitcoms. Instead, Marks and Gran have written a musical version, which is on the way in the next year or so.

The sitcom itself remains – appropriately – of its time. As Marks says: “It’s probably the most quintessential 90s sitcom there is.”

Paul Burton’s book on Goodnight Sweetheart will be published in 2024