Botha House is a B&B with service from a bygone-are. Previously the property of General Louis Botha’s wife Annie (Botha, unfortunately, passed away only months before the work on the house was completed and never saw the final product) and with a rich history that followed, this is a one of those places you should visit if you love the history of South Africa.

In Pennington, on the property of the Umdoni Park Golf Course, will you find this historic house completed in 1920. Two deluxe suites, two standard suites, two courtyard suites and a self-catering cottage are available. We were allocated a standard suite.

The room we stayed in had a good sea-view (something us Vaalies always appreciate when at the coast), service by the staff was first degree. A swimming pool is available. The communal lounge has a number of books and magazines available for those rainy days. The meals we had there were superb. In Pennington we discovered a small bookshop to our liking and the beach at Pennington is also safe to swim at. We also had some meals at the golf club and although the guys were very busy they managed to cope and we had no complaints about their service. a number of hiking trails are available throughout the golf estate and bird watchers must bring binoculars and their lists and books with. O, and then of course, if you are a golfer remember to bring your ama-sticky-stickies with!

Unfortunately, there were a few things at Botha House not perfect. However, we don’t feel the need to list it all and name-and-shame this place as the staff and surrounding facilities are beyond expectation. We understand that Botha House is managed by a trust and can only do so much with their money. We did bring all the issues to the attention of management and we hope that it will be sorted. The good news is that we noticed an entry on their web page that they were closed for a large part of 2018 in order to undergo a complete renovation. We certainly hope that these issues will be addressed and that patrons can have an even more enjoyable stay there once they re-opened.

Will we go back? Indeed we will. We hope to be invited again once the renovations took place and maybe do a completely new review on them. This certainly is one of those places where one can get lost in a small part of South African history.