A witness to the notorious “ice cream wars” killing of six members of the same family has told how he is still haunted by the screams of the victims. Brian Anderson was just 14 when six members of the Doyle family perished in their home as the result of an arson attack.

The 1984 Glasgow murders were committed as gangs battled for control of the city’s lucrative ice cream and drug trades. Brian, who was a neighbour and friend of the Doyles, has now spoken out for the first time about the shocking murders.

He said: “Our family stayed in Bankend Street in Ruchazie. It was a close knit community and we knew different members of the Doyle family. They lived a stone’s throw from us. I was pals with Anthony Doyle. As youngsters we would hang about with each other and play football in the street.

“On that terrible night I woke up to the sound of smashing glass, the commotion of voices and the howling screams which were really haunting. I’ll never forget those screams. I still get flashbacks.”

Brian, 55, added: “At first I thought I was dreaming. Then I woke up and I thought it was a party, a drunken affair, because it was common to hear trouble at parties in the East End. I fell back to sleep and woke up moments later as the screams grew louder.”

As the blaze took hold, Brian ran into the street only to discover his pal Anthony, also 14, could not escape the inferno. “I went out to the veranda as did all the neighbours and then I ran out onto the street and police and ambulances arrived,” he said.

“It was a shocking event but we didn’t realise quite what had happened until it made the press days later.”

On April 16, 1984, the front door of the Doyles home was doused with petrol and set alight. James Doyle, 53, sons James Jnr, 23, Andrew, 18, and Anthony, 14, and daughter Christina Halleron, 25, plus her 18-month-old son Mark all perished.

At the time, rival criminal gangs in the east end of Glasgow were involved in a turf war while allegedly selling drugs from ice cream vans. Thomas 'TC' Campbell, who died aged 66 in 2019, and Joe Steele, 62, were tried for the murders and convicted unanimously.

They were sentenced to life with a minimum of 20 years and served 18 years before both were freed after their convictions were quashed in 2004. The murders remain officially unsolved. Brian grew up to become a highly respected street photographer, documenting the people of Glasgow.

As part of his incredible career, he has rubbed shoulders with crime lords and their foot soldiers both in the UK and further afield. In a strange twist of fate, he has photographed many of those suspected of the Doyle murders including Steele and Campbell and former Glasgow Godfather, Arthur Thompson Snr’s enforcer Gary Moore.

Brian said: “I ended up involved with guys like TC Campbell who I photographed over the years for documentaries, books and magazines at various locations. I interviewed Joe Steele who was also wrongly accused.

“TC Campbell and Joe Steele went through various appeals and I interviewed them into the mid and late-nineties as well as for a couple of photography books based on criminals, one called Faces of the Underworld which told stories of crime through images.

“Tam McGraw was in the frame as well during that time as one of the ones arrested. I photographed him for different publications. There were several prominent figures. You do not ask if they committed the crime.

“You have a job to get some photographs but it is in the back of your mind. I would turn up and take the photographs. I had my opinion of what did and didn’t happen but the photographic side of things took precedence.”

He added: “Gary Moore was one of the first ones arrested. Years later myself and my picture editor wrestled a gun from Gary in the studio. He was waving it about and I was thinking, this isn’t the day to die.

“You don’t fear for your life but there could be an accident. Walking the streets of this city you really need to be careful because you could walk into the wrong person at the wrong time.”

Steele later claimed Tam ‘The Licensee’ McGraw ordered the hit on the Doyles. Brian said: “The first time I came face to face with McGraw, I turned up at his door with my studio light.

“He asked me what was in the bag. I joked that it was a bazooka and he said, ‘That’s okay then, you can come in’. McGraw wasn’t liked in the city by Glasgow’s underworld. He was called the Licensee because he was informing on other criminals.”

Brian is now launching a brand new online magazine called CrimeZone. Each issue will feature interviews with underworld figures along with many of his dramatic photographs captured over the years.

He said: “The new magazine called CrimeZone is a rebrand of my previous magazine called Glasgow Eyes, which has been going on and off for 10 years. Because I get a lot of messages from people interested in true crime, I’ve decided it is time to take the magazine UK-wide.”

CrimeZone will delve into contemporary and historic crime stories including monthly features such as Crime In Your Manor. Record readers will be first to read about the best of Brian’s stories each month.

To grab the very first issue of CrimeZone, priced just £2.99, log on to www.glasgoweyes.com