Bishop Philip invites you to join him at St John’s Cathedral, Portsmouth on Saturday 6th July for a Mass of Thanksgiving at 11 am to mark the 50th anniversary of the link between the Archdiocese of Bamenda and the Diocese of Portsmouth. He will be joined by Archbishop Andrew Nkea of Bamenda and Fr Bernardine Nsom, who will lead a delegation of 13 priests, religious and laity from Bamenda, visas permitting.

Please join us at the Cathedral for what promises to be a joyous Celebration Mass, followed by an exhibition and displays in the Discovery Centre, ending with Evening Prayer & Blessing at 4 pm. We are expecting to be joined by some 100 members of the Cameroonian Community from around the UK! Please come for all or any part of the day.

Prayer for the Golden Jubilee of the Bamenda-Portsmouth Link

Heavenly Father, we thank you for the bond of love and friendship which has existed between the Archdiocese of Bamenda and the Diocese of Portsmouth for fifty years. We are deeply grateful to you for the spiritual and material benefits this union has yielded.

Guided by your Word and filled with your Holy Spirit, may we receive the grace to grow in partnership and understanding as we celebrate as one body, sharing in the one bread of Christ.

Bless those who have made selfless sacrifices to sustain us, especially the priests who have served in our dioceses. May their work be rewarded in the abundance of your grace.

May Mary Immaculate, St Joseph, St Edmund and Blessed Pier Giorgio Frassati, our Patrons, intercede for us. Amen.

Twinned with Bamenda

Bamenda is the capital of North West Province in Cameroon, West Africa.

In 1970 the Bamenda Diocese had been created with Paul Verdzekov appointed as the first bishop. In 1974, Bishop Derek Worlock of Portsmouth and Bishop Paul Verdzekov of Bamenda initiated our diocesan twinning as a practical demonstration of the Pope’s Vatican II document “Gaudium et Spes” (‘Hope & Joy’).

To support this twinning relationship, the Diocese of Portsmouth comprises a team that supports, enables, directs and develops the relationship and ecclesial exchange between the Diocese of Portsmouth and the Archdiocese of Bamenda. This includes promoting prayer for one another, practical and financial support for projects, the organisation of exchange visits, the promotion of the link in our schools and parishes, and the sharing of news and information.

Priests and lay people of Portsmouth are appointed by the bishop to the Portsmouth Bamenda Committee which serves the link on behalf of the Diocese.

Currently, there are six fine priests from Bamenda serving in the parishes across our diocese and over the past 40 years more than £1,000,000 has been raised by Portsmouth parishioners for projects that have been successfully implemented in the areas of Faith, Health, Education and Social Welfare, locally by Ad Hoc committees in the Archdiocese of Bamenda.

Click here to view the recent letter from Bishop Philip Egan of Portsmouth to Archbishop Andrew Nkea of Bamenda.

Socio Political Situation

These are very challenging times, particularly for the people of our sister diocese in Bamenda with the deteriorating socio political situation in Cameroon.

The situation in the Cameroon has complex origins in the relationship between the French and English speaking provinces and in the recent imposition of controls by the political authorities. The situation has led to much violence and atrocities.

The International Crisis Group has stated that “both sides have committed abuses against the population, including burning villages, closing down schools and killing civilians. Violence has claimed around 3,000 lives, displaced half a million people and compelled another 40,000 to flee to Nigeria. It has deprived 700,000 children of schooling in their home areas and left one in three people in the Anglophone regions in need of humanitarian aid”. The Catholic Church has been forthright in condemning the violence on all sides and advocating for peaceful dialogue. We have heard many shocking stories from our friends in Bamenda and Bishop Philip asks for your prayers for peace, reconciliation and a just outcome.

Find out More