DANIEL C. ROPER

Typed Letter signed as Secretary of Commerce (1933), discussing an appointment

Typed Letter signed: "Daniel C. Roper" as Secretary of Commerce, 1 page, 8x10½. Washington, D.C., 1933 September 23. On official letterhead to Henry T. Rainey, Carrollton, Illinois. In full: "I want you to know that I very deeply appreciate the cooperation which you have given me in the matter of investigating the qualifications of Mr. Richard Spencer for the appointment of First Assistant Commissioner of Patents. It occurred to me from the examination of his record that he would fit into this position, but I did not want to recommend his appointment to the President without having your opinion of it. With kindest personal regards, I am Very sincerely". Daniel C. Roper (1867-1943) was a South Carolina state legislator and committee staffer in both houses of the US Congress before becoming Assistant Postmaster General under President Wilson. He was chairman of Wilson's re-election campaign, and then Chairman of the US Tariff Commission (1917) and Commissioner of Internal Revenue (1917-1920). Out of office during the Republican 1920s, he became President Roosevelt's Secretary of Commerce (1933-1938) and US Ambassador to Canada (1939). Paperclip crease at top margin. Normal mailing folds. Creased and lightly soiled. Adhesive residue (previous mounting) on verso with no show-through. Otherwise, fine condition.

This website image may contain our company watermark. The actual item does not contain this watermark

See more listings from these signers

Following offer submission users will be contacted at their account email address within 48 hours. Our response will be to accept your offer, decline your offer or send you a final counteroffer. All offers can be viewed from within the "Offer Review" area of your HistoryForSale account. Please review the Make Offer Terms prior to making an offer.

If you have not received an offer acceptance or counter-offer email within 24-hours please check your spam/junk email folder.