Post by babytims on

Since I only tested one of the several changes I made to this format, safe to call this the pilot.

On Monday, at some point, I am going to launch this pilot episode for the fall season of The Joker's Wild! I cannot wait to show the new dynamic production and the new format.

If you need a refresher of the rules, click here. Everything's still the same, except for the types of questions I'll use in the opening game, which I found to be problematic.

I'm still scrapping pieces of the game together, but for the most part I's ready. I need 3 willing participants por favor!

Post by babytims on

(Opening theme)

Bob Hilton: From Hollywood, here's the game where knowledge is king, and lady luck is queen. It's the all-new...

Joker's Wild Hour!

(Cheers)

With the star of The Joker's Wild Hour...Immanuel Tims!

(Cheers)

Tally ho! Welcome to The Joker's Wild Hour! This is a brand new spinoff of your favorite slot-machine based trivia game, where you spin that board, answer some questions, and win a whole bunch of cash! For the next hour, we'll introduce some new games that we think you folks at home will enjoy, and give our players the chance to win a ton of cash and prizes! Without further ado, Bob could you introduce our very first players for the hour?

(Contestants cue)

Bob: Sure thing, Immanuel! First, he's a cashier at a retail store, and loves to bowl in his spare time! From Eden Prairie, Minnesota, meet...Nels Snesrud!

Second, he's a mahjong player, who loves to sing and watch game shows! Hopefully, The Joker's Wild is among his favorites. From Spartanburg, South Carolina...meet George Cluster!

Finally, he's a supermarket clerk from Iowa, meet...Matt Ringgenberg!

(Cheers)

Welcome to the show, gentlemen! Great to have the three of you here! We'll find out about you guys as we play our little game here, which we'll actually get to right now! Fellas, I'll tell you right now that only two of you will be going to the second half of the show to compete head-to-head for the championship. The winner of said second half gets to play our Joker's Jackpot minigame, that can pay off up to $10,000...before going on to Face the Devil which can award you prizes worth more than $50,000!

(Cheers)

What we'll do right now is the opening game, that can determine how much money you can win in the first half of the show! I'll explain how to claim that dough in a moment, but first let's set the values. Nels, you signed up first so you'll be going first! Come on over to the giant lever!

(Applause)

Nels, nice to have you here with us tonight. Bob said you love to bowl. How long have you bowled for?