The Neighbourhood

Wiped Out!

The Revolve Group/Columbia Records

On its second full-length, "Wiped Out!," the Neighbourhood assembles songs as if borrowing the more palatable parts of Oasis, Maroon 5 and Drake, minus the thief's sneer, overeager seduction and charming self-absorption, respectively. With production seemingly modeled on Radiohead's soporific side, this album is even more soothing than 2013's "I Love You."

It isn't a markedly memorable sort of soothing, though, and frontman Jesse Rutherford sings about the personal without manifesting an unambiguous personality. If the Neighbourhood's popular art were an actual neighborhood, it would be a row of tract houses, each perfectly acceptable and each exactly like its neighbors.

— Jon M. Gilbertson,

Special to the Journal Sentinel

Steve Martin and Edie Brickell

So Familiar

Rounder Records

When Steve Martin collaborated with Steep Canyon Rangers on the road and on record in 2011's "Rare Bird Alert," it made sense for the comedian-turned-banjo picking master to tap the bluegrass group.

His collaboration with singer Edie Brickell on "Love Has Come For You" wasn't such an instant no-brainer, but the beautiful album's results – a Grammy Award for Best American Roots Song and a pending stage musical scheduled to hit Broadway next year – were undeniable.

On their follow-up collaboration, the pair have become even more of a cohesive musical voice looking to explore a wide range of sounds and influences. Eschewing the strict bluegrass that the banjo conjures and the folk sounds to which Brickell's voice naturally lends itself, the pair craft lush compositions that bounce and lilt brightly through words and music. "Always Will" skips down a string-picked melody hand in hand with Brickell's sweet lyrics. On the chorus of "I Have You," the pair both join voices over a simple tune of devotion. And, on "Heart of The Dreamer," Martin's banjo is joined by Bela Fleck's own Celtic-inspired picking and ethereal flutes for a rousing dance.

Steve Martin performs Nov. 20 at the Riverside Theater, 116 W. Wisconsin Ave.

— Erik Ernst,

Special to the Journal Sentinel

EL VY

Return to the Moon

4AD

Matt Berninger of the National and Brent Knopf of Ramona Falls have called EL VY a collaboration, not a mere side project. It's fair to say it is a collaboration carried out at a conversational volume, and thus at a lower level of intensity than each player achieves in his other indie-rock gig.

Berninger, as singer, is the more audible reason: his voice has more just-woken raggedness than usual, pushing him closer to late-period Leonard Cohen or Bob Geldof even when nudged by the tickly, trebly guitar of "I'm the Man to Be" or the Golden Earring, 1980s-rock saunter of "Happiness, Missouri."

Elements of Knopf's contributions, such as airy keyboard drizzles and mostly mid-tempo beats, don't urge Berninger to soar above muttering. The liveliest sound comes during "Sleepin' Light," when Portland soul man Ural Thomas shows sass that, while it fails to rouse Berninger, does give a jolt, and a gravitational tug, to "Moon."

EL VY performs Nov. 20 at Turner Hall Ballroom, 1040 N. 4th St.

— Jon M. Gilbertson

More online

Look for more album reviews at jsonline.com/music.

Marianas Trench

Astoria

Cherrytree Records/Interscope Records

Evidently, Canadian pop band Marianas Trench really love "The Goonies." The cover of the band's latest album "Astoria" — named after the town the film's adolescent adventurers hail from — is a spot-on recreation of the film's poster. And the name of its current tour is "Hey You Guys!!," taken from the film's most famous line.

And there are many, many other tributes featured on "Astoria." The hour-long album is peppered with sweeping, cinematic passages reminiscent of John Williams. "Shut Up and Kiss Me" is a riff on the title of Walk the Moon's huge summer hit "Shut Up and Dance," while its sound steals from the Jackson 5. And just like about a billion other acts over the last two years, Marianas Trench is heavily inspired here by the slick pop sounds of the '80s.

But Trench finds its own voice on the ukelele-led diddy "Dearly Departed," or in the way "This Means War" twists the lyrics, suddenly transforming from a story of romantic reconciliation to a song about spiteful revenge. Frontman and producer Josh Ramsay's voice recalls Freddie Mercury, but its still a stunning instrument. And the band has so much fun recreating old sounds — the seven-minute title track recalls Queen and Michael Jackson and Dire Straits and the Who — that "Astoria," much like "The Goonies," is impossible to resist.

Marianas Trench performs Nov. 18 at the Rave, 2401 W. Wisconsin Ave.

— Piet Levy,

plevy@journalsentinel.com

Various Artists

We Love Disney

Verve Records

Next to Christmas songs, there might be no collection like the music of Disney that is so rife for a broad cross-section of artists to combine and pay tribute. Sure, the songs of Mickey Mouse's company have long been cover fodder, but in this disc it is a group of today's biggest stars — including Ariana Grande, Kacey Musgraves and Tori Kelly — that turn their attention to the studio's film music (and some of their corporate acquisitions like Gwen Stefani's take on the Muppets' "Rainbow Connection.")

With such iconic songs, it is wise to not tinker too much with the original formula. Most of the singers follow that path to engaging results, letting their distinct voices – Ne-Yo's jazzy big-band approach to "Friend Like Me" from "Aladdin," Jason Derulo's slight gospel swing in "Can You Feel the Love Tonight" from "The Lion King" and even Fall Out Boy's jazzy "I Wanna Be Like You" from "The Jungle Book" — add to mostly classic and familiar arrangements.

In the few places, though, where the acts try too hard to alter the songs to their own sensibilities, like Rascal Flatts and Lucy Hale's country pop rendering of "Let it Go," they tend to fall flat.

Tori Kelly performs Monday at the Pabst Theater, 144 E. Wells St.