Pamela Lewis, music industry legend, visionary, history lover, preservationist, philanthropist, and friend arrived in Franklin in 1993. What she didn’t know was that the house she was entertaining buying as a place to ride her horses would be a home that changed the course of American history and would ultimately change her.

You see, Pam isn’t from the South. She often refers to herself as a “damn Yankee” who stumbled on Nashville by way of the music business. Whether you call it fate, destiny, or something else, the moment Pam laid eyes on the antebellum Greek Revival home known as “The Harrison House,” she felt an emotional connection. It was like when you meet your soulmate.

The Natural Beauty of Tennessee

The Harrison House is located on Columbia Pike, south of Winstead Hill, in one of the most picturesque landscapes of Franklin, Tennessee. In spite of its serene setting today, the home was famous for being the site of the command post for Confederate General John Bell Hood during the 1864 Battle of Franklin. In fact, it’s where General Hood held his last staff meeting before the battle, and it later became a hospital for the wounded. The home is also famous for being used as a spy headquarters and served as an army field hospital in both 1862 and 1864.

Surrounding the home are sixty-eight bucolic acres complete with barns, horses, turkeys, guineas, chickens, ducks, dogs, and cats. As you walk the property, you feel a sense of connectedness and grounding with an important piece of Tennessee history.

There is quite a fascinating story to tell about the Harrison House and its caretaker Pam Lewis. Not only did she help make Garth Brooks a superstar, she also championed the role of women in both the music industry and city government. Hold on to your horse, this backstory is one wild ride!

Enjoy our exclusive interview with Pamela in the video above along with story of this very special, multifaceted woman in the feature below.

Meet the Lady of the House – Pamela Lewis

Originally from New York state, Pamela Lewis grew up in a town called Red Hook, which she clarified is “Upstate New York, not to be confused with New York City.” Her father was a superintendent, principal and teacher. Pam graduated from Wells College on scenic Cayuga Lake, majoring in Economics and Marketing, and minoring in French and Communications. She did additional course work at Fordham University and New School For Social Research in New York City. She also attended Scarritt Bennett Center and received her Executive Mini MBA from Belmont University in Nashville. Pam even spent a year abroad traveling all over Europe. She believes “people should travel, learn and grow.”

Pam eventually found herself working as a secretary at MTV’s parent company, Warner-Amex Satellite Entertainment Company (now Viacom). She questioned why she went to college to become a secretary as she was “banging away at an IBM Selectric typewriter…” but she quickly got promoted to media marketing manager.

At the time, she was dating a photographer named John, who Pam describes as “a really funny guy, and he just hated country music with a passion.” John would tell her, “I got to go shoot these hillbillies, would you like to go to the Meadowlands with me?” She thought it sounded like fun, and had no idea it would lead to her talking with heads of major record labels like Joe Galante, Randy Goodman, and Tony Brown.

New York to Nashville

“I was so naïve,” Pam explained. “I didn’t know who they were. If I had known who they were, I would have been mortified and sat in the corner.” Pam believes in “power of place”, and these backstage conversations led her to Nashville. Cynthia Spencer, a PR marketing person at RCA, was getting married and looking for her replacement.

“I don’t want to live in Nashville,” Pam remembers thinking as she went on the interview wearing a vintage dress. “I was confident because I didn’t think I really wanted the job, and I was just myself.” Although she loved New York and did not want to leave, Pam decided she had to learn the music business and “quasi reluctantly” accepted the job at RCA records with label executive Joe Galante who was also originally from New York.

“I was scared to death, and it was really a stressful job, but it was a good learning experience.” At Wells College, she was taught about the importance of getting out of your comfort zone. Although there weren’t a lot of female role models or female managers, she looked for strong women in the music business to look up to. “I always felt like an outsider, because I was from New York,” Pam shared. “I talked too fast. I dressed weird.”

In 1984, she worked on the movie Rhinestone, which was filmed in Leiper’s Fork. Her client, Dolly Parton, co-starred with another New Yorker, Sylvester Stallone. After working for RCA for a year with a roster including Dolly and other legends like Kenny Rogers, The Judds, Vince Gill, Keith Whitley, and Alabama, Pam would be unfairly fired. She recalled that she refused the advances of one of her bosses. Shortly thereafter, her office was moved to a closet in what Pam believes was now an attempt to make her quit.

She refused to quit and was fired. She said she never made the connection between getting fired and refusing his advances until the “Me Too” movement. “At the time,” Pam thought, “I was just not the right person for the job.”

She was angry at herself, Nashville and RCA. “It was like dark night of the soul,” she shared, “but it got me on more of a spiritual path after I got through with being mean to myself and having a pity party.” To recover and fortify herself going forward after leaving RCA, Pam studied religion, meditation, and metaphysics. She had career counseling and read self-help books and philosophy to gain personal empowerment and refocus herself on a more spiritual path.

Making a Country Music Superstar – Garth Brooks

Little did Pam know, her destiny was about to change. Music industry executives like Tony Brown began sending her. As Pam continued to push through, she set a financial goal of becoming a homeowner. “I rolled up my sleeves and worked.” Not only did she achieve her goal of home ownership in East Nashville, but she also got the attention of her future business partner Bob Doyle.

Bob and Pam formed Doyle/Lewis Management. Their first client was a newcomer from Oklahoma by the name of Garth Brooks. Pam described this period in her life as when “the crazy merry-go-round started.” Pam and Bob didn’t have tons of money, but they were “scrappy” and creative. Pam believes “the differences are how the magic happened.” She helped make Garth a superstar.

Because of Pam’s drive and marketing genius, she helped open doors for Garth. She remained his manager for eight years. With more than 170 million records sold, he became one of the world’s best-selling artists. Billboard ranked Garth as the greatest male solo artist on the Billboard 200 chart of all time.

A Record Deal for Trisha Yearwood

But life on Music Row wasn’t easy. Although she felt “lucky to be in the room,” she also had to deal with some men underestimating her. “It was demoralizing,” Pam explained, “not to be taken seriously.” Pam persevered and helped another unknown, Trisha Yearwood, land her first record deal at MCA. Trisha’s first single “She’s in Love with the Boy” went to #1.

Doyle/Lewis managed Trisha as well as country rockers Great Plains, Trent Summar and Hank Flamingo, along with folk singers/songwriter Buddy Mondlock and Stephanie Davis, landing deals for all these acts as well as Garth.

Saving Historic Music Row

An astute businesswoman and long-term planner, Pam continued to build her impressive real estate portfolio, which included five Nashville properties on 16th Avenue South’s “Music Row”, along with a historic home on the National Registry in Franklin.

Pam explained “she thought it was important to have a diversified income source and continue her public relations agency. Tammy Wynette, who kept her beautician license even after she became a country music star, told Pam that “you don’t put all your eggs all in one basket.”

Many people moving to Nashville incorrectly think “Music Row” is Broadway when, in fact, it’s the district between 16th and 17th Avenues South from Belmont University to the “Musica” statue at the Division Street roundabout. At one time, the land was owned by Judge Oliver Hayes, the father of Adelicia Hayes Franklin Acklen Cheatham who built Belmont Mansion.

Adelicia was one of the wealthiest women in the South because her first husband was a wealthy slave trader. He owned cotton plantations in Louisiana and Fairvue Plantation in Gallatin. When her husband died in 1846, Adelicia was worth one million dollars.

The neighborhood around Belmont Mansion grew as Vanderbilt University and Ward-Belmont (now Belmont University) expanded. The transition of the surrounding homes becoming part of the music industry began in 1954, when producer Owen Bradley, along with his brother Harold Bradley, purchased a house at 804 16th Avenue South in Nashville to convert into a film and recording studio.

They tore out the first floor of the house to create recording space in the basement and attached a surplus Army Quonset hut to the back to use as a television studio. Nashville’s original Studio A was in the basement of this house. The Quonset Hut, later known as Columbia Studio B, was the first music recording studio in the historic Music Row district of Nashville.

Many famous singers including Brenda Lee, Johnny Cash, Patsy Cline, George Jones, Tammy Wynette, Bob Dylan, Roger Miller, Elvis Presley, and Loretta Lynn recorded at the Hut. Some of the most recognizable songs, including Patsy Cline’s “Crazy”, Brenda Lee’s “I’m Sorry” and Bobby Vinton’s “Blue Velvet”, were produced at the recording studio.

Other music business professionals began to move their offices into the area that soon became known as Music Row. By the early 1990s, some of the buildings were becoming run-down. Pam decided to buy five of them in a row on 16th Avenue South that had been condemned, 1225, 1227, 1301, 1303, and 1305. Those buildings had some famous legacies including being the home of Dot Records, Pi-Gem Music with Tom Collins, and Liz Rose Music Publishing. Liz Rose helped launch the career of Taylor Swift.

Pam chose 1303 for her new office for her public relations company, PLA Media. She continued her savvy decision making and leased out the other buildings. With her incredible team of Mark Logan, Becky Parson, and Ava Hundley, PLA Media is now one of the top PR agencies in Nashville.

Now travel back in time from Nashville’s Music Row to Franklin’s Harrison House.

The Remarkable Harrison House

In Pam’s book titled “Tennessee Yankee”, she shares how buying this historic Tennessee home changed her life. In the early 1990s, Pam was invited to a meeting she knew was pointless about a property on Demonbreun Street. She knew Garth would not be interested in the museum proposal featuring all things Garth. So Pam flipped the conversation and asked the real estate agent if he knew of any property she could buy for a place to chill and keep her horse.

That chance meeting led her on a path to Franklin. The drive to see the property on the south side of Franklin’s Columbia Pike led her to a historic home long forgotten. The realtor wanted to unload the house because it didn’t have sewer. Developers wanted to subdivide it, but it failed because of push back from local government during former mayor Lillian Stewart’s term. It was not cost effective to extend sewer up and down Winstead Hill, so topographic issues played a role as ultimately the house went into the Resolution Trust and was to be auctioned off.

Pam fell in love with the land and the old house. Little did she know that after she bought it, local preservationists would start contacting her. People like Robert Hicks, Rick Warwick, Ridley Wills, and Mary Pearce wanted to know her intentions for the house. Well, you see this home has a very important place in history. It all goes back to 1799, the year Franklin was founded by Abram Maury. Preservationists wanted to protect this important home and its view shed.

The Harrison family began with patriarch William Harrison, who was born in 1799. William moved from Virginia and settled in Williamson County, just south of the Harrison House. Williamson County’s first settler had been Edward Swanson. In 1778, he and Captain James Robertson and six other pioneers helped plan out the settlement of Fort Nashborough, which later became Nashville.

At age twenty, Swanson was given a land grant on the east side of the west fork of the Harpeth River for his services in the American Revolution. He laid a foundation for a cabin which was the earliest record of an attempt by a white man to make a settlement in Williamson County. The county did not come into being until 1799, but Swanson’s grant of 640 acres was surveyed in 1792. After securing Fort Nashborough from Indian attack, he settled in Williamson County with his wife Mary. They had three sons – Peter, Richard, and James. After Mary died, Swanson married Polly in 1823, and they had two more children, Ira and Adelia.

Swanson’s son Ira served in the 11th Cavalry of the Confederate Army. His daughter Adelia was H.G.W. Mayberry’s first wife. Mayberry later went on to build Beechwood Hall with his second wife Sophronia. Read about Beechwood Hall here.

William Harrison’s first wife was Nancy Adams. After her death, he married Mary Matilda Hughes Webb, widow of Dr. William Webb. She was the daughter of John and Sally Martin Hughes of Rural Plains where the present-day Berry Farms is located. You can see the family cemetery off Old Peytonsville Road in the middle of this planned community less than four miles from the Harrison House.

William Harrison, Sr. became an important leader and served as Sheriff of Williamson County from 1836-1842. He had several children by both wives including William Harrison, Jr. (shown above) and Matilda “Tillie” Harrison Briggs who married George Briggs (shown below).

The original part of the Harrison House was built in 1810 and faced the opposite direction from Columbia Pike toward another road that is no longer publicly used. It was built Federal style, and then extended and remodeled to face the new road of Columbia Pike in the Greek Revival style. You can see the exterior brick from the original house in the photo below, which is now enclosed as a den and part of the new house.

The striking square-columned portico is identical to Creekside. It was considered one of the finest homes in Franklin with immaculate gardens thanks to Mrs. Harrison.

There are two staircases, one in the rear where the present-day kitchen is located from the original home, and one in the stunning foyer. The staircase and newel post are still in beautiful condition considering the age of the home and the life it has seen.

The front parlors and spectacular dining room showcase Pam’s extensive antique collection, including a piano once used by Matilda and a settee she snagged at an estate sale at Rachel Donelson Jackson’s Tulip Grove.

The formal dining room is massive and boasts stunning buffets, fabulous chairs, and vintage serving pieces. Just imagine the dinner parties both old and new that have gathered in this room.

The floors are both cedar and poplar wood. This gorgeous candelabra (below) was a gift to the Harrison family from the Fountain Branch Carter family from Franklin’s historic Carter House.

There are so many fascinating pieces to the story of the home, but one of my favorites is the upstairs secret almost hidden room that Pam uses as a bedroom. It was the spy headquarters for Annie Briggs Harrison during the Civil War. Shown below, Annie was one of the many strong women who called the Harrison House “home”.

Now let’s talk about the disastrous battle the Harrison House witnessed, and its place at the center of America’s Civil War.

The Most Pivotal Home During the Battle of Franklin

The Battle of Franklin was one of the bloodiest battles of the entire war, yet one of the least discussed in American history. It’s hard to believe this very battle was planned out by General John Bell Hood in the front parlor of the Harrison House for the Confederate Army.

At the same time, the Federals were planning their attack in downtown Franklin at what is now the home of Rudy Jordan. Leading the charge was General John Schofield, Hood’s West Point classmate.

The activity at the Harrison House began a couple months prior. On September 2, 1864, Brigadier General John Herbert Kelly of the Army of Tennessee was shot in the chest in a skirmish at Parry Station near the Harrison House. He was the youngest Brigadier General for the Confederate Army, and his wounded body was brought to the Harrison House to be cared for until his death on September 4, 1864.

General Kelly was buried in the gardens of the Harrison House. Franklin residents had bought a metal coffin and new clothing for General Kelly to be buried in. He was laid to rest in the new clothes along with the uniform coat he was wearing the day he died. Eighteen months later in 1866, his body was moved to his home state and reinterred in the Magnolia Cemetery of Mobile, Alabama.

To understand the mindset of General Hood, keep in mind that he had just been defeated in the Atlanta Campaign by Major General William Tecumseh Sherman. As Sherman marched toward Savannah, Hood chose to move his troops of 39,000 north to Nashville. Even though they would be outnumbered by the Union’s 60,000 troops in Tennessee, Hood pushed forward with his plan. In Hood’s misguided goal, he hoped to gain 20,000 recruits from Tennessee and Kentucky and march to victory. His end game was to join up with General Robert E. Lee’s army in Virginia to defeat the North.

You see, Hood had a reputation for being a brave, but sometimes reckless, soldier. His left arm was wounded at the Battle of Gettysburg. It remained useless the remainder of his life. Later, at the Battle of Chickamauga in Georgia his leg was so severely wounded that it needed to be amputated four inches below his hip. The surgeon thought Hood would not survive, but remarkably, he recovered. He was a fighter and had something to prove.

The Civil War’s Battle of Franklin

The disabled Hood returned as a corps commander for the Army of Tennessee, quietly supplying his troops in northern Alabama the first three weeks of November 1864. After a month of skirmishes along the Tennessee and the Duck rivers, Hood divided Schofield’s army and surrounded a portion of it in Columbia, Tennessee. However, due to miscommunication and confusion by the Confederates, Hood missed a great opportunity to attack the Federals.

On November 29, 1864, Schofield held off a late afternoon Confederate attack at Spring Hill. Incredibly, his army moved quietly during the night toward Franklin along Columbia Turnpike while the Confederates were asleep. This disastrous mistake infuriated Hood. After surveying the situation from the adjacent Winstead Hill, Hood ordered a pursuit to Franklin, where he had one more chance to attack the Federals before they reached Nashville.

The meeting was held in the front parlor of the Harrison House. General Hood met with his other generals, including Nathan Bedford Forrest, who disagreed with the frontal assault. It was said that an enraged Forrest told Hood, “If you were a whole man, I would beat you within an inch of your life.” Forrest stormed out of the front parlor and out the door, furious because Hood was unmoved by Forrest’s objections. Hood was desperate and angry, a dangerous combination.

The front porch of the Harrison House was a flurry of generals and officers coming and going from the command center. In just a matter of hours the ground began to tremble from the roar of the five-hour bloody battle that began at 4pm on November 30, 1864.

Over 20,000 Confederate soldiers faced a frontal assault over two miles of open ground in Franklin against a Federal army who was entrenched behind three lines of breastworks and abatis.

The Battle of Franklin virtually destroyed the Army of Tennessee. With 8,578 casualties on both sides, more Confederate generals were killed at Franklin than in any other battle in the Civil War. With six dead generals including 6,252 Confederate casualties, Hood’s poor judgment would cause the eventual loss of Nashville to the Federals too.

The Army of Tennessee lost nearly 75% of its fighting force and was no longer a serious threat to the Federals. The Union victory at Nashville shattered Hood’s chances and effectively ended the war in Tennessee. After Nashville, the fall of the Southern Confederacy soon followed. You can read our story on the late Robert Hicks and his account of the Battle of Franklin.

From Command Headquarters to Field Hospital

The Harrison House would return once again to be a hospital for the wounded after that last fateful battle that changed the course of history forever. Like the other forty-four Franklin homes and buildings used as field hospitals, the wounded began pouring in.

General John C. Carter, General William A. Quarles, Captain Tom Henry, Captain Matt Pilcher, Colonel Walter, Colonel Jones, and Major Dunlap were among the wounded.

In addition to the doctors and nurses, Reverend Charles Quintard visited the wounded often to pray with them and the Harrison family. He had been nominated by soldiers in the Confederate 1st Tennessee Infantry Regiment to serve as their chaplain.

Reverend Quintard compiled the Confederate Soldiers’ Pocket Manual of Devotions that brought comfort to the soldiers. He later became the second bishop of the Tennessee Diocese of the Episcopal Church and the first Vice-Chancellor of the University of the South in Sewanee.

As General Carter lay in unbearable pain, Reverend Quintard brought up the subject of death. In his diary, he recalled the conversation on December 8, 1864. He writes, “General, if you do die, what do you wish me to say to your wife?” He whispered, “Tell her I have always loved her devotedly and regret (leaving) her more than I can express.” After that, he begged for chloroform to ease his pain. He died two days later at the Harrison House. At age twenty-seven, General Carter was the youngest of the six generals killed at Franklin.

The Harrison Family Descendants in Franklin

The Harrison family cemetery is located on Columbia Avenue just past Kittrell Road and enclosed by a rock wall next to the Edward Swanson’s family cemetery near his homesite.

One of William Harrison’s grandsons was James W. Harrison. He was a prominent businessman who founded the Williamson County Banking and Trust Company. The bank was largely responsible for the construction of several city landmarks, including the Historic Franklin Presbyterian Church.

James Harrison was married to Annie Briggs. The couple had no children but adopted James’ niece, Annie James, the daughter of his sister, Matilda Harrison, and her husband, George Briggs. Annie married Mrs. William Winder Campbell. George Briggs was also Annie Briggs Harrison’s older brother, so Annie James was Annie’s niece as well.

They were the parents of James and Stewart Campbell, and grandparents to Lillian Campbell Stewart, first and only female Mayor of Franklin. This is Lillian with a photo of her grandmother Matilda.

James and Annie Harrison lived in this gorgeous Queen Anne style home formerly located on the corner of Main Street and 5th Avenue in the Five Points District of Franklin. Sadly, this incredible home was torn down. In the 1890s, the James W. Harrison building was built in place of the Isaac Briggs house and store on the corner of 4th Ave. and Main Street and 4th Avenue where 55 South, Kilwins, and Jondie are located. You can still see the “Harrison” name on the top of each building.

Dr. Harry Guffee – Franklin’s Cowboy Doctor

Another famous resident of the Harrison House was Dr. Harry Guffee. He spent most of his life in Franklin and graduated from Battle Ground Academy. He graduated from Vanderbilt University in 1939 with his medical degree.

He worked as a doctor with Dr. Tandy Rice at the Dan German Hospital. During World War II, Dr. Guffee served the U.S. Army as a doctor for the troops. He was shot during the Battle of the Bulge and captured by the Germans who placed him in a prisoner of war camp.

After WWII, Dr. Guffee returned to Franklin where he resumed his medical practice and was regarded as a skilled surgeon. He was known as the traveling doctor for rural Williamson County. He would go where automobiles couldn’t reach these poverty-stricken families. With his medical bag in tow, he made house calls by horseback to care for patients, many of whom were too poor to pay him. Dr. Guffee’s generosity even led him to pay for many of their prescriptions. He delivered hundreds of babies in humble cabins with dirt floors. It was estimated he brought 4,342 Williamson County babies into the world.

As a member of the Franklin Rotary, Dr. Guffee also brought the Franklin Rodeo to town. Hundreds of people would line Main Street to see him leading the rodeo parade on horseback.

Interestingly, Dr. Guffee had an ancestor who was wounded in the Battle of Franklin and recovered at the Harrison House for several months. That story probably drew him to the house, because he made it his home. He and his wife, Dorothy, moved to the Harrison House with its sprawling landscape. It was perfect for their horses. Together, they raised five children. Dr. Guffee passed away in 1996 and remains highly thought of in the Franklin community.

Country Music Royalty Moves to the Harrison House

Another famous resident of the Harrison House was Jeannie C. Riley. She was best known for her 1968 #1 hit “Harper Valley PTA,” a racy song for the time penned by fellow Franklin resident, the late Tom T. Hall. It sold over six million copies and won both a Grammy Award and CMA Award.

The song was indirectly named after the Harpeth River that flows through Franklin and Nashville where the Harpeth Valley Elementary School is located.

In an interview with The Boot, Tom explained, “I was just hanging around downtown when I was about nine years old and heard the story and got to know this lady. I was fascinated by her grit. To see this very insignificant, socially disenfranchised lady, a single mother, who was willing to march down to the local aristocracy and read them the riot act, so to speak, was fascinating.”

Jeannie C. lived in the Harrison House later in her career and loved sitting on the portico and singing to the cows. Her book From Harpeth Valley to the Mountain Top can be purchased at Landmark Booksellers. Jeannie later moved back to her home state of Texas.

“The House That Loved Me”

Pam explains, “The Harrison House has been a blessing and an honor. The house found me and loved me. I’m just passing through trying to be a good steward.”

In 2003, Pam courageously ran for alderman-at-large in Franklin and won. She was the only female on the board for two years and vice mayor for a year during her four-year term. Her love for Franklin and historic preservation has grown into a life of service. She has served on multiple committees and has been appointed to both the Planning and Historic Zoning Commissions. She has worked closely with Lillian Stewart and Mary Pearce to help make Franklin the wonderful community it is today.

Their work helped reclaim the Eastern Flank Battlefield, establish important historic zoning overlays, and direct the City of Franklin to purchase Harlinsdale Farm as a city park. In addition, Pam helped establish Franklin as a Tree City USA.

Pam comes from generations of strong women going back to her great grandmother. Her parents were historic preservationists. Pam’s community outreach efforts include historic preservation along with global green space causes, women and children’s advocacy, educational scholarships, and fair housing. Her humanitarian outreach includes global environmental causes, animal rights, and mental health.

She was honored in 2022 by becoming a distinguished fellow of the Royal Society of Arts FRSA during Queen Elizabeth II’s Platinum Jubilee Celebration year. Founded in 1768, The Royal Society of Arts fellows include Stephen Hawkins, Benjamin Franklin, Charles Dickens, Hellen Keller, and Margret Thatcher. She is also a U.S. Ambassador for The Unity of Faiths Foundation.

The charitable work Pam has done is immense. Her foundation has given away hundreds of thousands of dollars to numerous charities. Her leadership in Franklin and Nashville is admirable. Some of the boards she has served on include Friends of Franklin Parks, Franklin’s Historic Battlefield Commission, Franklin Housing Commission, Franklin Civil War Historical Commission, Sister Cities of Franklin, Belmont Mansion, Nashville City Cemetery Board, the Tennessee Preservation Trust, the Tennessee State Museum, and BRIDGES, the only domestic violence shelter in Williamson County.

Just like the Harrison House, Pam is a fighter and a survivor. She has grit and resilience. Both her home and her own life have overcome battles which made them stronger. The juxtaposition of the exterior strength of the Harrison House with its towering columns contrasts its interior grace and refinement. It parallels Pam’s life. Her beauty comes from her moral fortitude mixed with the kindness of her heart.

Like any good friend, Pam has the courage to tell you the truth when you need to hear it. Her devotion is so big that it guides her into making the world a better place, especially right here in lovely Franklin. Thank you Pam for your legacy of love.

Thank you, Trenton Lee Photography, for your breathtaking photos and Rick Warwick for images of historic Franklin.

Sharing the backstories of historic Franklin with love,

About Buffie Baril