Nearly two decades after its original release (we know, we feel old too!) Mean Girls is coming back to the big screen. But this time, with a twist — it's a full-blown musical.

The film lands in theatres on January 12th, 2024, and we officially cannot wait. And now, we've got a brand new trailer to get excited about.

While this trailer may only include a very Gen-Z Olivia Rodrigo needle drop, do not be deceived: this movie is indeed a musical and will be featuring a full soundtrack of bangers straight from the Broadway show. We are already loving the look of the all-star cast that includes Reneé Rapp, Angourie Rice and Auli'i Cravalho, along with Tina Fey reprising her role. This movie musical promises to be the event of 2024.

Speaking to Variety in 2020 about the announcement, Tina said: “I’m very excited to bring Mean Girls back to the big screen. It’s been incredibly gratifying to see how much the movie and the musical have meant to audiences. I’ve spent 16 years with these characters now. They are my Marvel Universe and I love them dearly.”

Here's what we know about the project so far:

Who is in Mean Girls?

Get ready for a truly epic new version of Mean Girls, because this cast is, in the words of the great Gretchen Weiners, “so fetch.”

First, we've got Angourie Rice (Mare of Easttown, Spider-Man) taking over from Lindsay Lohan as the new girl Cady Heron. Auli'i Cravalho, best known for voicing Moana, stars as Janis Ian.

As the plastics, we've got singer Reneé Rapp reprising the role of Regina George after a successful run on Broadway as the Queen Bee. Bebe Wood plays Gretchen, while Avantika takes on the role of the ditzy Karen. Chris Briney, best known as Conrad in The Summer I Turned Pretty, will be playing heartthrob Aaron Samuels.

Rounding out the cast is Mad Men's Jon Hamm as Carr, Emily in Paris' Ashley Park (who originated the role of Gretchen Weiners on Broadway) as a teacher, Jenna Fischer as Cady's mum and Busy Phillips as Regina's mum. Tina Fey and Tim Meadows are also reprising their roles from the original film.

Is there a poster for Mean Girls?

There is, and get ready for it to blow you away. As the soon-to-be-famous song goes, her name is Regina George, and she is a massive deal: