It's hard to believe that it's been nearly 20 years since the original Mean Girls debuted in cinemas; and now, in what is sure a delight to fans, Mean Girls the musical, a movie adaptation of the Broadway production, is headed to the big screen, breathing new life into the classic Tina Fey project.

When the very first Mean Girls hit theaters in 2004, it didn't take long for audiences everywhere to instantly fall in love. They gravitated toward its comedic take on bullying in school and the movie's overall quotability. Lines like "Stop trying to make fetch happen" and "She doesn't even go here" are still recognizable to this day.

So what can you expect from this new Mean Girls? Well, here's everything we know about the movie, including the release date and cast.

Mean Girls the musical heads to cinemas on Friday, January 12, in the US. In the UK, the film premieres in movie theaters on Friday, January 19.

Mean Girls the musical trailer

On January 3, another trailer was released for the movie to continue drumming up the anticipation. Check it out below.

Here is the official trailer for the new movie, and it you were a fan of the classic, you may find yourself excited to see the reimagined Mean Girls after checking out the following clip.

Mean Girls the musical cast

A few actors from the original movie are in the new film. Tina Fey and Tim Meadows reprise their roles as Ms. Norbury and Principal Duvall, respectively. Fey wrote the screenplay for the original Mean Girls, but she is also a nine-time Emmy winner having risen to fame on Saturday Night Live before starring in 30 Rock, Only Murders in the Building and recently, A Haunting in Venice. Meadows is also an SNL alum who starred in Ladies Man and the Grown Ups franchise.

Here are the other actors rounding out the main cast, including an alum of The Office.

Angourie Rice as Cady Heron

Auli'i Cravalho as Janis Ian

Reneé Rapp as Regina George

Jaquel Spivey as Damian Hubbard

Avantika as Karen Smith

Bebe Wood as Gretchen Wieners

Christopher Briney as Aaron Samuels

Jenna Fischer as Ms. Heron

Busy Philipps as Mrs. George

As far as the actresses who played the core four high school girls in the original Mean Girls making an appearance in the new movie, Amanda Seyfried, who played Karen, shared with Entertainment Tonight that she and her co-stars would be up for making cameos.

Mean Girls the musical plot

Here is the official synopsis of the movie:

"From the comedic mind of Tina Fey comes a new twist on the modern classic, Mean Girls. New student Cady Heron (Angourie Rice) is welcomed into the top of the social food chain by the elite group of popular girls called 'The Plastics,' ruled by the conniving queen bee Regina George (Reneé Rapp) and her minions Gretchen (Bebe Wood) and Karen (Avantika). However, when Cady makes the major misstep of falling for Regina’s ex-boyfriend Aaron Samuels (Christopher Briney), she finds herself prey in Regina’s crosshairs. As Cady sets to take down the group’s apex predator with the help of her outcast friends Janis (Auli’i Cravalho) and Damian (Jaquel Spivey), she must learn how to stay true to herself while navigating the most cutthroat jungle of all: high school."

Mean Girls the musical directors

Arturo Perez Jr. and Samantha Jayne worked together to direct Mean Girls the musical. For both Perez and Jayne, the film seems to be their biggest project to date.

Where to watch Mean Girls