This Valentine's Day, why not reminisce about some of our past onscreen crushes? From Chad Michael Murray to Zac Efron, boy do these men make us swoon onscreen and off.

There's one actor who got away, though, and we can't stop thinking about him. The ultimate teen character whose hair looked sexy pushed back, Aaron Samuels, is a name forever immortalized to millennials everywhere. As if his physical appearance wasn't fetching enough, Aaron wooed both Regina George (Rachel McAdams) and Cady Heron (Lindsay Lohan) in the 2004 classic.

We all know what McAdams and Lohan are doing today, but the entire Mean Girls cast hasn't stayed so A-list. So what has Aaron Samuels, aka Jonathan Bennett, been up to since his Mean Girls fame? Keep scrolling to find out about Bennett's life today, and where you can still watch him onscreen! Hint, his good looks aren't the only thing delicious about him — this talented star can bake, cook, and juggle it all.

Jonathan Bennett has been whipping up a new fanbase in the culinary world. Per Insider, Bennett hosts hit Food Network show Cake Wars, and even has written a cookbook with Bachelorette alum Nick Peterson. The title? None other than The Burn Cookbook: An Unofficial Unauthorized Cookbook for "Mean Girls" Fans. The cookbook boasts recipes for "Glen Coco(a)" and other fun movie-themed dishes. Ever the entrepreneur, Bennett co-owns travel agency Outbound Travel, which offers adventures for the LGBTQ+ community and their allies, according to the company website. As of his personal life, Bennett got engaged to longtime love Jaymes Vaughan in November 2020, per People.

Bennett has further appeared on various reality TV shows, including Celebrity Big Brother and Dancing With the Stars. Yet he hasn't hung up his acting chops just yet. Bennett also starred in The Last Sharknado: It's About Time and The Haunting of Sharon Tate, and Hallmark holiday movies like The Christmas House. Of course, Bennett like the rest of us can't quite ever forget Aaron Samuels. He reprised his iconic role for Ariana Grande's "thank u, next" music video in 2019, much to Mean Girls fans' excitement!