This is not a drill: we’re headed back to the world of Mean Girls, and we have a feeling that it’s going to be so fetch. 💖

Mean Girls has been a cultural phenomenon since its theatrical release in 2004, starring Lindsay Lohan, Rachel McAdams, Amanda Seyfried, and Lacey Chabert. The teen flick’s hilarious one-liners have been referenced time and time again, and even spawned a Broadway musical adaptation by its original writer and producer, Tina Fey and Lorne Michaels, in 2017.

Now, the Broadway adaptation is being made into a movie for Paramount+, and needless to say, ~the limit does not exist~ on our excitement. The script of this new movie is in good hands with Tina Fey, who is returning to the world of The Plastics once again after writing the screenplay for 2004’s Mean Girls and the on-stage script of Mean Girls the Musical.

“I’m very excited to bring Mean Girls back to the big screen,” Tina Fey wrote in a 2020 statement. “It’s been incredibly gratifying to see how much the movie and the musical have meant to audiences. I’ve spent 16 years with these characters now. They are my Marvel Universe and I love them dearly.”

If you weren’t able to catch any of the Broadway performances in New York City before the show stopped during the COVID-19 pandemic, this upcoming film is the perfect chance to see Cady, Regina, Janis, and other characters come to life musically. Here’s everything we know about the Mean Girls musical movie, from its cast to its release date.

What is the plot of Mean Girls?

This musical movie will be based on both the Tony-nominated Broadway show and the cult-favorite O.G. Mean Girls movie, so we can assume that the plot will be similar to both.

The 2004 chick-flick classic follows Cady Heron, a new student at North Shore High School who recently moved to Illinois from Africa, as she learns to navigate the tricky waters of cliques, shopping malls, walking in high heels, and figuring out where to sit in the cafeteria. Cady is quickly adopted by a popular group of girls known as The Plastics (Regina, Gretchen, and Karen) but her friends Janis and Ian persuaded her to sabotage them after they discover that Cady likes Regina’s ex-boyfriend, Aaron Samuels. Through a series of mistakes, Cady learns that although there’s a reason The Plastics received their shallow nickname, she’s not innocent in her efforts to take them down, either.

However, Reneé Rapp (Regina George) explained to Us, "A lot of it is different. Tina is such a creative genius and such a creative freak, and her partner, Jeff Richmond, who does all of the music, is as well. So there’s definitely different things." Rapp continued, “There might be different songs. Some songs that are in the musical version might be in the movie or might not be.”

It seems like the plot of the new movie is in good hands, though, because Rapp praised Tina Fey and Jeff Richmond for adapting the plot to "work with young people and people that are of the current culture." She concluded, "Some things are different, some things are the same.”

Who is in the Mean Girls musical movie cast?

It was announced in December 2022 that Angourie Rice (Honor Society, Black Mirror, Spider-Man: Far From Home), Auli’i Cravalho (Moana, The Little Mermaid Live!, Crush), Jaquel Spivey (A Strange Loop) and Reneé Rapp (The Sex Lives of College Girls) have been cast in the upcoming musical movie.

Angourie plays Cady Heron, Auli’i stars as Janis Ian, Jaquel portrays Damian Hubbard, and Reneé — who was part of the Mean Girls Broadway cast! — takes on the iconic role of Regina George once more.

On December 10, 2022, Reneé posted a throwback photo to announce that she will reprise her role as the iconic Mean Girls character in its upcoming musical movie adaptation. “mean girls is one of the biggest reasons why I am where I am. it’s an honor. tina, jeff, lorne, eric and 2019 mean girls fans, I love you,” she wrote in her caption.

In February 2023, the cast was expanded once more. Avantika Vandanapu (Senior Year) and Bebe Wood (Love, Victor) will star as Karen Smith and Gretchen Wieners, respectively, while Christopher Briney (The Summer I Turned Pretty) will play Aaron Samuels. Deadline later revealed that The Office star Jenna Fischer will portray Ms. Heron, Cady Heron’s mom (portrayed by Saturday Night Live star Ana Gasteyer in the 2004 flick) and Busy Phillips will star as Mrs. George, Regina George’s mother (originally played by Amy Poehler).

On March 22, Deadline broke the news that up-and-coming actor Mahi Alam (American Born Chinese, New Amsterdam) has been cast as our Mathlete king Kevin G. Additionally, Connor Ratliff (Dead Eyes, The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel) will play the role of Mr. Rapp, a teacher at North Shore High. Mr. Rapp is a new character that wasn’t in the original film or musical, so we’re eager to see how he plays a role in this new story.

The latest casting news arrived on March 24, when The Hollywood Reporter announced that Jon Hamm (Mad Men, Top Gun: Maverick) is slated to play Coach Carr, North Shore’s gym teacher, in the film. The role was not included in the musical adaptation, but is featured in the original movie for a limited number of scenes.

Lorne Michaels will produce the new film with Tina Fey, who is writing the screenplay. Like the Broadway adaptation, music will be written by Jeff Richmond with lyrics by Nell Benjamin.

Will any of the original cast members be coming back?

Rumor has it that all four of the O.G. Plastics — Lindsay Lohan, Lacey Chabert, Amanda Seyfried, and Rachel McAdams — are interested in returning to the Mean Girls world with appearances in the new movie.But Page Six reports that negotiations have been stalled due to disagreements over salary. A “highly placed production source” explained, “Paramount Pictures doesn’t want to pay the girls what they are worth. All four girls were willing to come back, but Paramount has not been respectful of what they are worth."

McAdams commented on the new movie in a recent interview with Bustle, saying, "I don't see a way to shoehorn us in." But not all hope is lost, because the actress added that she's willing to take on the project if Tina Fey can come up with a creative way to include her. "If Tina can figure it out, I'm there, for sure," she said.

Jonathan Bennett, who played Aaron Samuels in the original movie, has also teased potentially returning for the new project. "There's some talks going on about certain things," he exclusively told PEOPLE at the 34th GLAAD Media Awards. "Let's just say that."

Bennett added, "[It was] fun to be a part of a movie like Mean Girls, where so many people have such a good reaction and such a heartwarming feeling when they think about our movie, because it changed their lives in so many ways. It changed my life."

It has been confirmed that Tina Fey and Tim Meadows will reprise their roles as Ms. Norbury and Principal Duvall. “Teachers work forever,” quipped Fey on Late Night With Seth Meyers.

When is the Mean Girls musical movie soundtrack coming out?

It’s unclear when the soundtrack to the film will come out, but the good news is that there was a recording session on February 16, 2023. Reneé Rapp posted a video with the rest of the cast on her TikTok account, writing, “No one is wearing pink btw.” In the clip, the cast comes into the frame and looks down at Reneé’s phone while her song “Too Well” plays in the background.

The 23-year-old actress, who reprises her role as Regina George, also confirmed that the Mean Girls soundtrack was being recorded. While promoting the deluxe version of her EP, Everything to Everyone, on her Instagram Stories, she corrected the release date of the EP in her post, writing, “2/24 sorry we’re recording Mean Girls and I am multitasking.”

Reneé posted another TikTok on February 17, revealing that she was on her way to record the fan-favorite track, “World Burn.”

Has the Mean Girls movie started filming?

Yes! Production officially began on March 7th, according to an official announcement posted on the @meangirls Instagram account. The caption reads, "Get in, loser. We’re starting production on Mean Girls Musical. 💕 #MeanGirlsMovie."

When is the Mean Girls musical movie being released? Is there a trailer?

There’s no word yet on when the Mean Girls musical movie comes out, but you already know we’ll be on the lookout for more details as they come. Keep checking back for more information.

How can I watch the Mean Girls musical movie?

Since the Mean Girls musical movie is being adapted for , it will likely stream exclusively on the streaming service. You can also watch the original Mean Girls movie online at , or rent or buy the film on . There is no confirmation at this time on whether there will be a theatrical release for the film.