Bob and Mike Bryan, the winningest doubles team in men’s tennis history, are playing host Saturday to the Grand Slam Jam and benefit concert at Malibu Racquet Club, with the proceeds going to the Bryan Brothers Foundation and Bogart Pediatric Cancer Research Program.

Thousand Oaks graduate Sam Querrey is also expected to join the Bryan brothers – Camarillo residents and Rio Mesa High alumni – along with Mardy Fish, Lindsay Davenport, Vania King, Rick Leach, Scott Davis, Jeff Tarango, Vince Spadea and Derek Rostagno.

Inspired by Andre Agassi, the Bryan brothers have become contributors to the Bogart Pediatric Cancer Research program.

Founded in 1984, the program was named in memory of the late record and film producer, Neil Bogart, who died of lymphoma at age 39.

The benefit schedule will include a round-robin doubles tournament from 9 a.m.-1 p.m. The afternoon events include a clinic with the pros, a pro-am match, an exhibition and live auction.

Mkrtchian commits to play tennis at UCLA

Reigning Southern California Sectional 18-under singles champion Dennis Mkrtchian, a Reseda resident who played at SOCES, has verbally committed to play tennis at UCLA.

Mkrtchian, a former City Section finalist, joins Thousand Oaks senior Marcos Giron in committing to the Bruins.

The addition of Giron and Mkrtchian give UCLA plenty of young talent from Southern California, joining former Warren standout Daniel Kosakowski and Crossroads graduate Clay Thompson.

Viewpoint volleyball plays host to Dig Pink event

The showdown for first place in the Liberty League girls’ volleyball race between Viewpoint and Buckley will have added significance at 5 p.m. Friday when the Patriots play host to their “Dig Pink” fund-raising event in support of breast cancer awareness month.

Proceeds from the match, organized by Viewpoint senior Claire Meriwether, will go to the Side-Out Foundation.

Chaminade held its annual “Dig Pink” match Tuesday, joining Crescenta Valley, La Canada, Saugus, Verdugo Hills and other area teams in contributing to the Side-Out Foundation.

Harvard-Westlake looks to make statement at Mt. SAC

The only thing missing from the impressive resume compiled last year by the Harvard-Westlake girls’ cross country team was a victory at the Div. IV sweepstakes race at the Mount San Antonio College Invitational.

With last year’s winner Coronado scheduled to compete in the race at 4:58 p.m. Friday, the Wolverines – led by Cami Chapus and Amy Weissenbach – are looking to begin their march toward repeating as Southern Section and state champions in Div. IV with a strong performance at the event’s 63rd annual meet.

USC Hall of Famer Bedsole to speak at QB Club

Hal Bedsole, a USC receiver from 1961-63 who was inducted into the Trojans Hall of Fame in 2001, is the scheduled speaker Friday at the Pasadena Quarterbacks Club luncheon at Brookside Country Club in Pasadena.

Bedsole, who played for the Minnesota Vikings (1964-66), scored two touchdowns for USC in a 42-37 win over Wisconsin in the 1963 Rose Bowl.

Lunch is served at 11:30 a.m. and Bedsole is scheduled to speak around 12:15 p.m. Cost is $25 for members and $30 for non-members.