James Thomas "Tom" Stewart

James Thomas “Tom” Stewart, 69, died Oct. 9, 2016, surrounded by his family and friends.

He was born and raised in Tampa. He was a proud Hillsborough High School Terrier, where he lettered in both football and baseball. He still has many loved friends from high school and childhood. He proudly and passionately served his country in Vietnam in the United States Army. He was honorably discharged at the rank of staff sergeant and was a disabled veteran.

He later became a teacher at Oak Grove Middle School and was chosen as Teacher of the Year three times. He became an assistant principal and later principal at Ben Hill Middle School. He then moved to the principal position at Youth Services, where he was runner up for Principal of the Year. He became the principal of Tomlin Middle School in Plant City and led it to receive “A” ratings for many years. His professional experience as an educator gave him many friends who dearly loved him. He touched the lives of many teachers, staff and students as well as many in the Plant City community, where he lived for the last 18 years. He received his Ph.D. from Sarasota University. He later taught as an adjunct professor at Barry University and St. Leo University, among others. He held his mortuary license and worked in funeral homes beginning in high school and throughout his life, even after his retirement from the school system. He loved his work and was very genuine in his caring for grieving families. His deep faith kept him focused. He served on the Bishop’s Educational Committee, as a lector and a Fourth Degree Knight.

When his health became an issue, his cabin in Blairesville, Georgia was a place of refuge, where he enjoyed spending quality time with his wife and family. He was able to make one last trip to say farewell. He will be remembered for his kind soul, love for his family and friends, his love of life and deep faith.

He is survived by his wife, Judy Anne (Sobrecueva) Stewart; sons, Kris (Missy), Jason (Diane) and Derek; stepdaughter, Yvonne Balbin; grandchildren, Dylan, Wyatt, Ava and Hunter; dogs, Webster, Yukiko and Dazey; and brother, Glen Stewart.

He was preceded in death by his brother, Dale; and parents, Martha and William “Bill” Stewart.

A Mass was held Oct. 18, at St. Clement Catholic Church, in Plant City.

Online condolences may be made at HaughtFuneralHome.com.