By Melissa Willets

Published Dec. 21 2023, 11:54 a.m. ET

The Gist:

Hulk Hogan spoke out about what his Christian faith means to him in a recent post on Instagram.

He also shared that was baptized at age 70 at a Baptist church in Florida.

The WWE star's wife also took part in the baptism, which Hulk shared on social media.

Article continues below advertisement

Perhaps the most famous World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) star of all time, Hulk Hogan, may seem tough as can be on the outside, but inside, it appears that the muscle-bound icon is nothing but a soft and gooey lover of, well, love, as well as "surrender" and "service" of the Lord.

Read on to find out how religion has become a very important part of his life again, and how he and his wife recently reaffirmed their faith. He shared all the details.

Article continues below advertisement

What has Hulk Hogan said about his religion?

Hulk posts photos and videos showing off workouts to his social media accounts, but he also took to Instagram on more than one occasion to talk about his commitment to Christianity.

Article continues below advertisement

The wrestler professed in an April 2023 post, “I accepted Christ as my savior at 14 years old. The training, prayers, and vitamins kept me in the game, but now that I am one with God, the main event theme of surrender, service, and love makes me the Real Main Event that can slam any giant of any size through the power of my Lord and Savior. And so it is, even now, brother, AMEN!”

While we don't know exactly what prompted Hulk to recommit himself to Christ, the reality star and his wife, Sky Daily Hogan, were baptized in a Florida church just before Christmas 2023.

Article continues below advertisement

Hulk Hogan posted about his baptism, which comes at an interesting point in his life.

"Total surrender and dedication to Jesus is the greatest day of my life. No worries, no hate, no judgment… only love!" the wrestler captioned photos and video footage from his and Sky's baptism at Indian Rocks Baptist Church.

Article continues below advertisement

The New York Post reports that the couple was married at the same church in September.

The baptism comes on the heels of the WWE alum's son Nick being arrested in Clearwater, Fla. for DUI, which was also reported on by the Post.

Sadly, this wasn't the first time that Nick had a brush with the law. He was involved in a horrible car accident in 2007 that left his friend John Graziano with a severe brain injury.

Article continues below advertisement

Meanwhile, the star's daughter Brooke doesn't seem to be in a good place with her dad. Brooke confirmed that she decided not to attend his latest nuptials — this is the Hogan Knows Best star's third marriage.

"For my own journey to healing and happiness, I have chosen to create some distance between myself and my family, and am focusing on people and things that heal my heart and align with my own personal beliefs, goals, and values," she explained in part on Instagram.