For the past seven months, retired wrestling superstar Hulk Hogan has become increasingly vocal about his Christian faith. On Thursday evening, he also entered the political arena, going all in for Donald Trump at the Republican National Convention (RNC).

In December 2023, Hogan announced that he had been baptized, describing it as the “greatest day” of his life. In February, he told Trinity Broadcasting Network that “what’s going to be important to me moving forward is being the vessel to spread this message because it’s the only truth there is. Everything else is just temporary.”

At the RNC, several pastors and Christian leaders offered prayers and remarks, including evangelist Franklin Graham. Hogan, a member of a Southern Baptist church, was the only one to rip off his shirt.

Hogan emerged on the stage waving an American flag before taking his place behind the podium. Clothed in a red bandana, a sports coat, and a cutoff shirt emblazoned with an image of himself in front of an American flag, Hogan put his hand to his ear as the crowd chanted, “U.S.A.! U.S.A.!”

“Well, let me tell you something, brother,” Hogan shouted into the microphone. “When I came here tonight, there was so much energy in this room, I felt [like] maybe I was in Madison Square Garden getting ready to win another world title.”

“The vibe was so intense, the energy was so crazy, it felt like maybe I was gonna press that no-good stinking giant over my head and slam him through the mat, brother,” Hogan said, referencing his wrestling rival, the late Andre the Giant.

As he spoke, lights reflected off of the large gold cross necklace around his neck.

Hogan continued, “But what I found out was I was in a room full of real Americans, brother!”

“And at the end of the day, with our leader up there,” Hogan said, pointing to Trump, “my hero, that gladiator, we’re going to bring America back together—one real American at a time, brother.”

Referencing Trump and his newly announced running mate, Ohio Sen. J.D. Vance, Hogan said, “I see the greatest tag team of my life standing upon us, getting ready to straighten this country out for all the real Americans.”

RELATED: Hulk Hogan Describes the Impact of His Christian Testimony on Former Wrestling Foe Roddy Piper

Hogan went on to say that if Trump is elected, “all the real Americans are gonna be nicknamed ‘Trumpites’” and that “all the Trumpites are gonna be running wild for four years.”