Share via:

Hulk Hogan is not shying away from his faith in God.

After getting baptized at the end of last year, the world was in awe of Hogan’s commitment to Christ. Now, he’s sharing why he’s all in for Jesus Christ.

As Church Leaders reported, Hogan, whose actual name is Terry Gene Bollea, first became a Christian as a young teenager. However, he wavered away from the path of righteousness. Now, he is seeing the love and faithfulness of God.

Breaking News. Spirit-Filled Stories. Subscribe to Charisma on YouTube now!

Hogan says God, “has given me the opportunity to prove that I’m faithful, and I’ll never make those mistakes again. Going back to my faith, the momentum was overwhelming. There was nothing stopping me.”

Hogan says reading Scripture has been a key part of his development in Christ.

“I’m either all the way in or all the way out with whatever I do. So if you’re with me, there’s no guesswork. If I’m with my Lord and Savior, I’m all the way in,” Hogan says.

Hogan’s testimony since his public display of commitment to Christ has made a major impact on people not only in the U.S., but around the globe. In his interview with The 700 Club, Hogan explained how he’s been blessed to impact multiple generations across international boundaries.

Pastor Aaron Filippone of Indian Rocks Baptist Church says this “ripple effect” is an example to others to live and walk in the ways according to God’s Word. Hogan’s baptism and proclamation in Christ has inspired the masses.

Get your FREE CHARISMA NEWSLETTERS today! Stay up to date with current issues, Holy Spirit news, Christian teachings, Charisma videos & more!

“He had people in Japan calling him just a couple of minutes later,” Filippone says. “This is the way that Christians go public in their faith, and he felt it important to do what Christians do.”

One of the most important moments in Hogan’s faith journey related to a surprise voice message from wrestling rival “Rowdy” Roddy Piper. Piper, who passed away in 2015, had questioned and discussed faith and spirituality in the past with Hogan. Hogan received the message two days after Piper died.

As The Western Journal reported, Piper’s voice message said, “I’m walking with Jesus today, my brother. Walking with Jesus, loving you and praying for you.”

Hogan also says Piper’s message started with him singing “I Saw the Light.”

For whatever reason Hogan didn’t receive the message until after Piper’s passing, he says “He would have never said that when he was here.”

As Hogan shares his testimony and supernatural occurrences with the world, we can expect many more lives to be impacted by his declaration of faith.

Join Charisma Magazine Online to follow everything the Holy Spirit is doing around the world!

Abby Trivett is a marketing copywriter and coordinator for Charisma Media.