Rich, handsome and mysterious, millionaire Dimitri Marick first appeared in Pine Valley as the man who rescued Natalie Hunter from a well on the Wildwind estate where she was being held by Janet Green. Dimitri and Natalie got engaged, but that ended when Dimitri's first wife, the formerly comatose Angelique, was wheeled into their engagement party by Angelique's mother Helga.

Later, Dimitri learned that his boyhood frenemy, Edmund Grey, was also the son and heir to his father Hugo Marick, which caused major friction. He also learned he had a long-lost son, Anton Lang, by family maid Corvina Lang, who had seduced him when he was young and drunk.

Dimitri and Erica Kane began their love affair but during a rough patch he slept with his sister-in-law, Maria Santos Grey, and Maria learned she was pregnant. Skye Chandler learned about the affair and doctored the results to make it look like Dimitri was the dad. Erica learned about it and ended things badly. She let Maria believe the baby had died. She then passed it off as a baby she adopted for herself from Russia.

Dimitri then tricked ownership of the TV station WRCW from Stuart Chandler. Liza Colby learned he violated an FCC regulation, and she took over ownership.

Dimitri sought custody of Maddie after Maria died in a plane crash. When he found out Maddie was biologically Edmund's daughter he took off to Budapest until Edmund and Tad Martin brought them back to Pine Valley.

Dimitri and Edmund eventually became close again.

Dimitri stood by Brooke's side throughout her trial for murdering Jim Thomasen. After Brooke was acquitted, she and Dimitri got close but she wasn't ready to get involved with another man.

Dimitri began having dizzy spells and flew to Europe to be checked out. He was referred to one of the top neurologists in the world, Dr. Alexandra Devane. She diagnosed Dimitri with a very rare disease that prevented brain cells from rejuvenating themselves. She developed a miracle cure that put the disease in remission. They fell in love and got married.

On their way back to Pine Valley Dimitri was believed to have suffered a fatal brain aneurysm, but Alex had really hid him at Seaview Hospital, where he fell into a coma. Edmund accused Alex of killing Dimitri so she admitted Dimitri was still alive but needed experimental stem cell therapy to live. Colby Martin was believed to be the donor but Adam swapped the cells with another child's. Even so, the procedure was a success - until Dimitri was believed to have sneaked out of the hospital, walked into the ocean, and drowned. His body was never recovered.

In May 2000, a wheelchair-bound Dimitri was pushed through the corridors of a Welsh hospital. A secret group had kidnapped him because he had started to dig into Alex's past.

Dimitri's therapy continued and was successful, but he pretended to be catatonic so he could eavesdrop. The director of the secret group was Alex's mother, Charlotte, who ordered him thrown from a plane.

Dimitri washed up on a beach near Pine Valley and stayed in hiding until he asked for Edmund's help in getting Charlotte out of Alex's life. Charlotte was turned over to the police and David Hayward insisted on treating Dimitri.

Dimitri agreed, but only if David let everyone believe he was dead. David accepted, but his assistant Dixie found out. Dixie agreed to keep Dimitri's secret, but eventually sent Alex to the hunting lodge at Wildwind where they had an emotional reunion.

Dimitri and Edmund worked together to throw Ryan Lavery and Gillian Andrassy a surprise second wedding, but Dimitri was shaken when Gillian was killed a few weeks later. Dimitri and Alex left Pine Valley for Europe on what they said was a honeymoon but before they left he received a phone call claiming to have information for him.

Dimitri returned to Pine Valley on June 12, 2013, at the request of Brooke English. She asked him to head up the new online media division at Chandler Media, as well as keep a close eye on JR Chandler, who had just woken up from a five-year coma.