Ali Landry's husband has been seen in public for the first time since his father and brother were killed during a suspected cartel kidnapping in Mexico.

Film director Alejandro Gomez Monteverde was spotted climbing out of his car in front of the Los Angeles home he shares with former Miss USA Ali Landry and their three children.

Despite the tragedy he appeared to be putting a brave face on things, before walking inside his house.

Monteverde was spotted just days after he was reported to have scattered the ashes of father Juan Manuel Gomez Fernandez and brother Juan Manuel Gomez Monteverde.

According to US Weekly, the pair said their final farewell on Wednesday as they scattered the ashes off the coast of Tampico, Mexico.

The men's bodies were found on Saturday, two weeks after they initially went missing from an area of Mexico currently in the midst of a battle between the Los Zetas and the Gulf Cartel.

Investigators are still trying to work out exactly what happened to the pair, though it is thought they fell victim to this bitter feud, as ransom demands are a key source of income for many cartels.

It is thought that Monteverde and Landry had paid one ransom sum to the suspected kidnappers, but refused to pay a second until they had evidence that the men were alive.

Monteverde and his wife are yet to make a statement about the brutal killings.

Monteverde, who most recently directed the film Little Boy starring Emily Watson and Tom Wilkinson, posted a photo of his father earlier this year on Instagram, writing; 'Celebrating in San Miguel de Allende, with my best friend, my life mentor, the wisest man I know. My father.'

Monteverde, 38, has been married to Landry, 42, since 2006 and the couple have a daughter aged eight, and two younger sons.

Landry became a household name as the Doritos Girl thanks to a 30-second commercial that aired during the Broncos-Packers Super Bowl XXXII game in 1998.

She married Alejandro Gomez Monteverde in 2006 - two years after her marriage to Saved by the Bell actor and television host Mario Lopez was annulled after two weeks due to his infidelity during the bachelor party with a stripper.

Monteverde's actor friend Eduardo Verastegui, who has starred in both of his films, sent his condolences via Twitter.

He wrote; 'With a heart full of pain and sadness, I ask for prayers for my friend and 'compadre' Alejandro Gomez Monteverde and all his family.

'My deepest condolences to my soul-brother, I love you so much 'compadre', I put my heart in your hands and I join you in this deep pain.'

Kidnapping in the Tamaulipas region of Mexico has become an industry and it is no longer centered on rich entrepreneurs, as victims can come from many walks of life.

The battle being waged by the government of President Enrique Pena Nieto against violent criminal activities has had ambiguous results.