Story

Ali Germaine Landry (born July 21, 1973) is an American actress, model, and media personality.

She rose to international fame after winning the Miss USA pageant in 1996.

You are watching: Ali Landry Biography: Husband, Age, Net Worth, Fitness, Eminem, Instagram, Height, Wikipedia

She also stood her ground in front of her fans by entering the film industry.

She has appeared in many Hollywood films such as the role of Rita Lefleur in Eve, a UPN television series.

American actress

Ali Landry Ali Landry: History, Biography, Photos Wiki Events & About Data First and last name: Ali Germaine Landry Stage Name: Ali Landry Born: July 21, 1973 (age 50) Place of birth: Breaux Bridge Nationality: American Husband/wife • Husband: Alejandro Gomez Monteverde Job: Actor • Model Net asset value: $6,000,000-$10,000,000

Early life

Ali Landry was born to parents, Gene Allen Landry and Renella Landry. She is an American and was born on July 21, 1973.

Having a talent for acting and modeling, she began to express her creativity from a young age. She was noticed in many school beauty pageants and was an active member of her high school drama group.

Ali Landry Biography, Children, Husband, Age, Net Worth, Fitness, Eminem, Instagram, Height, Wikipedia

See more : Who are Mookie Cook’s parents, Chantel Ramsey and Kenneth Cook?

Despite her passion for acting, Ali Landry also wants to be a business pioneer, with a particular passion for design and graphics.

Education

Ali Landry attended Cecilia High School to complete her basic, intermediate and secondary education and graduated in 1991.

She earned her degree in Mass Communications from the prestigious University of Louisiana at Lafayette, formerly known as the University of Southwestern Louisiana.

Career

After completing her higher education, Ali Landry entered the modeling industry and began trying her hand at modeling jobs.

During this time, she appeared in several beauty pageants including Miss USA. She won the prestigious crown in 1996.

She then appeared in films such as Super Bowl commercials, Outta Time, Me Again, Bella, Crescendo I, Beautiful, Little Boy, Who’s Your Daddy?, Repli-Kate and Soulkeeper.

She took a break from acting in 1998 and chose to work in the corporate world as a movie star. She was named one of the 50 most beautiful people in the world by People magazine.

She gained widespread recognition as an actress after playing Rita Lefleur in the UPN television series, Super Bowl commercials.

See more : Symbas (SymbasErothick) Biography: Images, Videos, Age, Net Worth, Boyfriend, Wikipedia

As a model, Ali Landry has worked with many emerging brands around the world. She has a significant online media presence, which makes it easy for her to promote these brand organizations.

Filming

Sunset Beach

I don’t know anything.

Conan the Explorer

Primetime comedy

Kevin can wait

Criminal psychology

Fast way

Social Media

Ali Landry’s trusted Instagram handle is @alilandry. She has over 85k fans on the page.

Personal life

Ali Landry married entertainer and television personality Mario Lopez on April 24, 2004, in a Roman Catholic ceremony.

She called off the wedding fourteen days after discovering Lopez had a threesome at his bachelor party.

Ali Landry then married film producer Alejandro Gomez Monteverde on April 8, 2006 in San Miguel de Allende, Mexico.

Their union was crowned with three young people; Estela Inez, Marcelo Alejandro and Valentin Francesco. She has a model height of 1.73 m.

Net asset value

World famous American model and television personality, Ali Landry has amassed a huge estimated net worth of $6,000,000 to $10,000,000.