Ali Landry and her husband have scattered the ashes of their family members who were killed in Mexico last week.

The bodies of Landry’s father-in-law Juan Manuel Gomez Fernandez, and brother-in-law, Juan Manuel Gomez Monteverde, were discovered on Saturday with critical head wounds after the pair had been kidnapped over two weeks earlier.

An investigation into their deaths is ongoing as officials test a vehicle that may have been used by the kidnappers or killers.

Scroll down for video

The bodies were found on September 19 after they had been kidnapped on September 4, with the two men being killed despite a ransom being paid.

Landry, who was crowned Miss USA in 1996, and her husband, director Alejandro Gomez Monteverde, scattered the ashes off the coast of Tampico, Mexico on Wednesday according to US Weekly.

The two have yet to speak publicly about the incident.

Monteverde, who most recently directed the film Little Boy starring Emily Watson and Tom Wilkinson, posted a photo of his father earlier this year on Instagram, writing; 'Celebrating in San Miguel de Allende, with my best friend, my life mentor, the wisest man I know. My father.'

It has been reported that the family had made one ransom payment to secure the release of the men, but they refused a demand to give another payment, asking for proof that the pair were still alive.

Juan Manuel was a business partner at La Pecerita restaurant that allegedly reported drug cartel activity in the past.

It comes amid drug cartel wars between Los Zetas and the Gulf Cartel, in the area where the father and son were killed.

Monteverde, 38, has been married to Landry, 42, since 2006 and the couple have a daughter aged eight, and two younger sons.

Landry became a household name as the Doritos Girl thanks to a 30-second commercial that aired during the Broncos-Packers Super Bowl XXXII game in 1998.

She married Alejandro Gomez Monteverde in 2006 - two years after her marriage to Saved by the Bell actor and television host Mario Lopez was annulled two weeks after their marriage due to his infidelity during the bachelor party with a stripper.

Monteverde's actor friend Eduardo Verastegui, who has starred in both of his films, sent his condolences via Twitter.

He wrote; 'With a heart full of pain and sadness, I ask for prayers for my friend and 'compadre' Alejandro Gomez Monteverde and all his family.

'My deepest condolences to my soul-brother, I love you so much 'compadre', I put my heart in your hands and I join you in this deep pain.'

Kidnapping in the Tamaulipas region of Mexico has become an industry and it is no longer centered on rich entrepreneurs, as victims can come from many walks of life.

The battle being waged by the government of President Enrique Pena Nieto against violent criminal activities has had ambiguous results.