In a lot of ways, The Subhumans are like D.O.A.’s unappreciated little brother. While the band didn’t face a great number of adversities, the few they did were major. They were constantly living in the shadow of two bands, D.O.A. and another, more well-known band from the UK also called Subhumans.

In a lot of ways, the D.O.A. comparisons do make sense, as both bands formed out of the breakup of The Skulls, with Joe “Shithead” Keithley forming D.O.A., and Gerry “Useless” Hannah, Ken “Dimwit” Montgomery and Brian “Wimpy Roy” Goble forming The Subhumans. Later, after the breakup of The Subhumans in 1982, Ken Montgomery and Brian Goble joined a newly reformed D.O.A., with Goble staying with the band, performing old Subhumans songs and writing Subhumans-style songs until 1995. Meanwhile, the UK Subhumans sound absolutely nothing like the Canadian band, but due to the massive popularity of bands from the British punk scene at the time and the failure of the Canadian band to really break through in the United States, the Canadians Subhumans are largely ignored by a huge number of people.

Another reason The Subhumans remain largely ignored by people in the punk community is their unfortunate dealings with a shady San Francisco record label, CD Presents. In 1980, the band recorded and released their would-be (should-be) classic album Incorrect Thoughts, released on Friends Records. By 1982 the original lineup of the band had broken up and in 1985 an unauthorized repressing was issued by CD Presents with an altered (and pretty terrible looking) cover. Even now there is a lot of confusion about how CD wound up issuing the record. Nobody from the band was contacted by the label, nobody from the band authorized the release, no royalties were ever paid and to this day, nobody in the band has any idea how many copies of the record were pressed. CD Presents collapsed not long afterwards, and in 2005 after releasing a new album of original material called New Dark Age Parade and years of fan pressure, the newly-reformed Subhumans set in motion plans to re-release the record. When the band contacted the owner of the now-defunct record label he claimed to ownership to the rights to the album, despite the fact that there didn’t seem to be any legal basis for the claim, or any kind of documentation to support it.

Unfortunately, the band also didn’t have any written record of their original agreement with Friends Records, who had originally released the record. Until very recently, the only way to hear this should-be classic record in its entirety was to either be incredibly lucky at a used record store or find a download of the record on the internet. In 1996 a compilation entitled Pissed Off… With Good Reason! was released, featuring songs from the bands singles, EPs and two albums, but no Incorrect Thoughts. It might seem like I’m going off on a bit of a tangent here, but think about all of the well-known, or moderately-known punk bands from that era, that people still listen to today. Every one of them, with very few exceptions, is still known because at some point or another somebody decided to reissue their records. With no reissue, it’s no wonder why the Canadian Subhumans remained in obscurity for so many years. In 2010, after considering entering what could be a lengthy legal battle with the CD Presents owner, the band instead decided to re-record the album as Same Thoughts, Different Day, releasing it on Alternative Tentacles Records with a few tracks that didn’t make it onto the original.

In addition to existing in obscurity, the Canadian Subhumans continues to exist, somewhat paradoxically, in infamy. After the breakup of the band in 1982, bassist Gerry Hannah became involved in a grassroots political activist group called Direct Action, whose frustrations with several political and environmental issues pushed them towards armed struggle. Some of their actions included the bombing of a highly controversial hydroelectric plant under construction in Southern British Columbia, the bombing of a Litton Systems plant outside of Toronto, which was manufacturing guidance systems for American first-strike Cruise missiles, and the firebombing of three Red Hot Video pornography outlets, which distributed videos containing torture, mutilation and sexual violence towards women. While the group went to great lengths to ensure that they were only taking part in property destruction, and not injuring people, one security guard at the Litton Systems plant was seriously injured by the explosion. While Hannah did not take part in any of these actions, he did support them, and did plan to take part in other actions, including robbing a Brinks truck driver in order to fund future actions. In 1983, Hannah and the rest of the group were arrested on these charges, as well as various weapons and conspiracy charges and served several years in jail. Now, Hannah wants to focus more on his music, putting his past actions and attitudes behind him. For a more detailed account of the Direct Action story, check out Fury’s Hour: A (Sort Of) Punk Manifesto by Warren Kinsella, or Direct Action, a memoire written by group member Anne Hansen.

Here’s a track off of Incorrect Thoughts, “Death at Birth”

The band’s classic, and most covered punk anthem “Fuck You”

And “Firing Squad”, another track off Incorrect Thoughts

Selected Discography

Incorrect Thoughts LP (1980)

No Wishes, No Prayers LP (1983)

New Dark Age Parade LP (2006)

Death Was Too Kind Compilation (A collection of their early singles and EPs) (2008)

Same Thoughts, Different Day (2010)