WITH SUCH a glut in the video market, there's bound to be a dog or two out there. "The China Lake Murders," a mystery starring Tom Skerritt, is certainly one of them.

According to the story, Officer Jack Donnelly (Michael Parks) travels annually to China Lake for his summer vacation, where he rides up and down the lonely Mojave Desert highway stopping motorists and stuffing them into the trunks of their cars to cook to death in the noonday sun. Some vacation.

Five years and some 30 murders later, Sam Brodie (Skerritt), the sheriff of sleepy China Lake, begins to notice a suspicious pattern.

Meanwhile, Donnelly has befriended Sam, and is staying in the trailer behind Sam's home. One or two beers together, and bingo. Sam figures out that this is the guy. Unfortunately, it takes two or three more murders to nail him.

This film is silly and hopelessly predictable. Screenwriter N.D. Schreiner has cast Donnelly as evil incarnate, and Sam as a country bumpkin with barely an idea rattling around in his head. Donnelly, once a good cop, delivers one or two sinister speeches that are meant to explain his change of heart. Frankly, it's still a mystery to me.

Schreiner gives Sam an ex-wife and a young son. No casting problem here, because we hear them only on the telephone. He also gives Sam a lovely blond secretary. She's worried about her boss, and does her part by wearing tank tops and micro-miniskirts to the office.

The film features a pair of romantic interludes, one for each cop, as though to apologize for all the foolishness. It won't work.

In a nutshell, then, "China Lake Murders" is a twisted officer's video version of "What I Did on My Summer Vacation." It's one of those made-for-TV movies that the networks should play across from the Super Bowl. The less damage done, the better.

"Mr. Frost," on the other hand, is a psychological thriller that you can really sink your teeth into. It's an intriguing story with a spine-chilling ending, and stars Jeff Goldblum, Kathy Baker and Alan Bates.

As the film opens, Mr. Frost (Goldblum), a refined sort with a penchant for gourmet cooking, is under suspicion for the torture and murder of 24 people. He confounds his nemesis, Detective Detweiller (Bates), who is finally ejected from the force because of his fanaticism with the case.

After investigations in asylums in England, Germany and Switzerland, Frost is sent to St. Clare's Hospital, where he meets Dr. Sarah Day (Baker). He breaks his two-year silence to explain his case only to her.

The original screenplay by Philip Setbon and Brad Lynch is a pleasure to behold. They give Goldblum wonderful lines, wonderful qualities and a most compelling argument. The story would be superb, in fact, if not for the lunacy in the middle. Since Mr. Frost's arrival at the asylum, the lame walk, the dead rise again, and a poor psychotic has taken to gunning down men of the cloth.

However, the authors manage to pull it back together at the end.

Baker, of "Clean and Sober," is not consistent, but she is compelling as Dr. Day. Bates ("An Unmarried Woman") is charming as the detective, and compulsive as the fanatic who knows Frost's real identity.

Goldblum, of "The Fly" and "Earth Girls Are Easy," is fabulous as the seductive, mysterious Mr. Frost. He's graceful and hypnotic, appealing and repulsive. Hey, I'll buy it: He's the devil. He's a pleasure to watch, no matter how outlandish his roles may be.

Equally appealing in his own slicked-back way is Peter Weller, star of the action-thriller "Rainbow Drive." He's Mike Gallagher, acting head of the Hollywood homicide division. He stumbles upon a multiple murder while mixing it up with a married woman in the ritzy Rainbow Drive section of the city.

He jumps out of bed, chases but loses the perpetrator, notices that the cops have responded before they were even called, and realizes one of the bodies is missing. So he smells a rat and follows it all the way to the top of the department.

On the way, he loses his partner and his mistress, and meets a lovely police psychologist who isn't what she appears to be.

"Rainbow Drive" is certainly fast-paced, action-packed, and a good solid vehicle for Weller ("RoboCop"). He's an interesting balance in this role -- smart as a whip but hopelessly naive, sophisticated but awkward.

Sela Ward, of "Nothing in Common," is the police psychologist. She's sharp, especially in her deception. Bruce Weitz, better known as Belker of "Hill Street Blues," is very good as Gallagher's partner, Dan Crawford.

The script by Bill Phillips and Bennett Cohen is based on the best-selling novel by Roderick Thorp (he also wrote "Die Hard"). It's action-packed and thrilling, but confusing as could be. What exactly went wrong, who's involved, and why was there a coverup at all? Oh, there are hints of drugs, money laundering, vice and corruption. And there are names bandied about. However, the writers sacrificed story clarity for non-stop action and excitement. The chase itself outmaneuvers the quarry.

For this film, then, I recommend a group screening, with discussion to follow. You'll need all the extra eyes and ears you can get to sort out the faces and facts.

However, do not detain your friends for the screening of "The Unbelievable Truth," or they will no longer count themselves your friends.

This Hal Hartley film is a comedy romance about a cynical model and an ex-con. Audrey (Adrienne Shelly) is the model who dresses in black, can hear the bombs in the distance (she lives outside of New York City), and is forever fretting about nuclear buildup and the ozone layer. She concocts these absurd deals with her father, Vic Hugo -- I wouldn't make that up -- about college, her career and her love interests.

Josh (Robert Burke) is the ex-con who studied auto mechanics at Sing Sing and has returned home to ply his trade. The townsfolk know he's a murderer, but cannot remember if it was one, two or 12 murders.

There are other characters, such as Audrey's ex-boyfriend whose life is one continuous shoving match over his lost love; the local grease monkey, who philosophizes about life while playing the electric guitar; and the out-of-towner who comes on to women with his camera.

There are plenty of good jokes here. But "The Unbelievable Truth" is a joke beaten to death. It plays like a cross between Ingmar Bergman films and "Saturday Night Live." It has its moments of high humor, and some of the dialogue is very good. But its suppressed romance and forced long faces grow wearisome after 30 minutes. You can get the same effect by watching MTV with the sound off.

CHINA LAKE MURDERS, PG-13, 1991, 89 minutes, MCA/Universal (available)

MR. FROST, R, 1991, 90 minutes, SVS Video (available)

RAINBOW DRIVE, R, 1991, 93 minutes, Vidmark Entertainment (available)

THE UNBELIEVABLE TRUTH, R, 90 minutes, Vidmark Entertainment (available Feb. 27)

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.