Promising battles, killer diseases, daring (or mad) explorers, pirates, riots, sewage and brain-improving educational bits, The Bristol Story: a graphic and (mostly) true history of the greatest city in the world traces the rich and dramatic history of Bristol from the earliest times to the present day.

It was written by Eugene Byrne and illustrated by Simon Gurr (illustrated above). Like Eugene and Simon's acclaimed graphic-style biography of Isambard Kingdom Brunel, published as part of the Brunel 200 celebrations in 2006, The Bristol Story has been driven by four key aims: to be entertaining, to be informative, to be challenging and to wave the flag for Bristol. The 200-page book is targeted at a readership of around 11 and upwards, and its mix of historical research and irreverent humour should appeal to both children and adults. A simplified version for younger readers has also been produced for use in primary schools.

Eugene is Consulting Editor of Venue magazine, as well as an author of three novels, and a freelance journalist for newspapers and magazines. Born in Ireland, Eugene grew up in Burnham-on-Sea and settled in Bristol in 1981 after seeing a mummy being dissected live on CCTV at the City Museum and Art Gallery. He compiles the Days Out West Guide for Venue, and is a regular contributor to BBC History magazine, as well as to the Bristol Evening Post's Bristol Times.

Cover image for Venue magazine to coincide with their give-away of The Bristol Story.

Simon is a freelance artist who draws and writes comics, illustrates books and develops material for websites, including ARKive, an initiative of Wildscreen in Bristol. For the 2004 Great Reading Adventure he adapted The Day of the Triffids for serialisation in the Bristol Evening Post. He is a graduate of the University of the West of England.

Read an interview with Eugene and Simon .

Download Eugene and Simon's St Vincent's Rock, a graphic-novel created for the Bristol 2008 Capital of Culture bid .

Read about Isambard Kingdom Brunel: a graphic biography .