18 March 1956

On this day in 1956 Deborah Jeane Palfrey, DC Madam, and founder of Pamela Martin and Associates escort agency was born.

Palfrey was a cocktail waitress turned escort agency madam who had several brushes with authorities before being convicted of pandering, pimping and extortion in 192 she spent 18 months in prison before establishing Pamela Martin and Associates upon her release from jail.

She was dubbed DC Madam by the news media during her racketeering and mail fraud trial in 2008. Palfrey always protested the legitimacy of her business which is said to have provided companionship services for many of Washington DC’s movers, shakers and money makers including, reputedly, Vice President Dick Chaney and other political and diplomatic heavyweights.

Notwithstanding her protestations of legitimacy and legality Palfrey was found guilty as charged on 15 April 2008.

Her lifeless body was found hanging in a barn just over 2 weeks later Palfrey having committed suicide rather than face the prospect of returning to prison.

20 February 2005

On this day in 2005 Hunter Stockton Thompson, father of gonzo journalism and author of cult classic Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, took his own life.

Hunter S Thompson was known for his work as a journalist through his groundbreaking work in documenting the inside workings of the Hell’s Angels Outlaw Motorcycle Club, for his lifelong substance use and abuse including of alcohol, LSD and Mescaline among others, his love of firearms and his hatred of Richard M Nixon. Continue reading

© Copyright 2012 Category Zero. All Rights Reserved.

All posts are the opinion of the poster and are not endorsed by Category Zero by reason of their posting, non removal or any other act or omission.

If you find any of the material on this site offensive or in breach of any right claimed by you contact the blog administrator at category.zero.blog@gmail.com setting out your grievance in detail.

Please ask before using original content contained on this site.