Happy Birthday John Wayne

John Wayne was born Marion Robert Morrison in Winterset, Iowa, on May 26, 1907. Starring in over 200 movies, Wayne became an American icon, whose name and image were synonymous with the rugged Wild West.

Battle of Glorieta Pass

On March 26, 1862, Confederate forces launched the Battle of Glorieta Pass, aimed at breaking Union control of the West along the base of the Rocky Mountains. It has been called the “Gettysburg of the West” because it was a turning point in the Civil War.

Happy Birthday Laura Ingalls Wilder

Acclaimed author Laura Ingalls Wilder was born on February 7, 1867, in Pepin County, Wisconsin. She retold stories from her childhood in the wildly popular Little House on the Prairie series, which went on to become a popular TV series as well.

Legends of the West Controversy

On October 18, 1994, the USPS issued a corrected Legends of the West stamp sheet after it was discovered they had made an error in their original design. It was one of the biggest stamp stories in years!

Death of John C. Frémont

Explorer and soldier John C. Frémont died on July 13, 1890, in New York City. Nicknamed “The Pathfinder,” Frémont led several expeditions to the American West, served in the Civil War, and was a promising presidential candidate.

Start of the California Gold Rush

On January 24, 1848, gold was discovered at Sutter’s Mill, beginning the California Gold Rush. Thousands quickly flocked to the area in hopes of striking gold.

Death of Nellie Cashman

Nurse, businesswoman, and philanthropist Nellie Cashman died on January 4, 1925, in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. Spending much of her life running boarding houses near mining camps and caring for sick miners, she became known as the “Miners’ Angel.”

Birth of Bill Pickett

Cowboy and showman Bill Pickett was born on December 5, 1870. During his life, he was famous for his “bulldogging” act at rodeos. Decades after his death, he became famous once again, as the subject of rare modern stamp error…

Birth of Annie Oakley

Annie Oakley was born Phoebe Ann Mosey on August 13, 1860, in Darke County, Ohio. She was one of the most talented sharpshooters of her day and solidified the image of the American cowgirl.