Nadarajah Guruparan, the senior Colombo-based Tamil journalist who was abducted on Tuesday, was released by his captors at 3 am on Wednesday, thanks to the effective action instituted by the President of Sri Lanka Mahinda Rajapaksa.

In a brief statement made to his radio station Sooriyan FM hours after his release, Guruparan said that he was told by his captors that he was abducted for a purpose and would be released once that purpose was served.

Guruparan, who was News Manager at Sooriyan FM and a well-known journalist for 25 years, thanked fellow journalists, political leaders, international organisations, the President of Sri Lanka, the police and army for his release.

Top leaders like Alavi Mowlana, Governor of the Western Province, and AHM. Azwer, Presidential advisor and Media Ombudsman, had met President Rajapaksa on Tuesday and urged him to secure the release of Guruparan, who they described as a very balanced journalist.

The President immediately called the Inspector General of Police Chandrasiri Fernando and asked him to trace Guruparan.

Journalists of various organizations like the Free Media Movement (FMM) had organised a demonstration in Colombo against the abduction.

FMM's Convenor, Sunanda Deshapriya, said that Guruparan had been getting telephonic threats from people who were against his radio station's news coverage.

FMM said that it suspected the hand of the pro-government Tamil paramilitary groups in the abduction.

Mounting attacks on scribes

There has been a number of attacks on journalists in Sri Lanka in 2006.

On August 20, Sinnathamby Sivamaharajah, Managing Editor of the pro-LTTE Tamil newspaper Namadhu Eelanadu, was shot dead in Jaffna.

On July 12, Sampath Lakmal, a freelance Sinhala journalist, was killed in Boralesgamuwa near Colombo.

On January 24, SS Rajan, a journalist with the Tamil paper Sudar Oli was gunned down in Trincomalee.

The offices of the Uthayan daily in Jaffna were attacked by gunmen.

The offices of Sudar Oli in Colombo were searched, and the security provided to its editor N Vithiatharan and proprietor Saravanapavan was withdrawn without assigning any reason.

Later, a building used as a storehouse by Sudar Oli in Jaffna was torched.

Media reports alleged that state-backed shadowy elements had done these deeds.