This is an edited collection of essays exploring the intersection between documentary film and disability studies. Documentary has played a significant role in the social construction of disability, and this volume aims to make an explicit connection between these two disciplines in order to shed light on the past and the current potential of documentary in the socio-cultural construction and awareness of disability. Consequently, it illuminates the topic not only from an academic perspective, but also offers a practice-focused viewpoint from industry practitioners and practice-based researchers. It highlights the need to discuss contemporary portrayals of disability, practices of disabled filmmakers and industry policies that determine access, inclusion and representation. At the same time, it adopts rigorous methodologies that explore film texts, authorship and spectatorship in order to assess the current situation of disability in the television and independent documentary sector. On a more social level, the purpose of this volume is to address the medial construction of disability and reduce “otherness” as a phenomenon of cultural stigmatisation.

In a country like India that addresses issues of sex and sexuality rather inadequately, discussion and awareness regarding sexuality and disability seems a rather elusive goal. The experience of cis. women as well as LGBTQ persons with disability largely reflects double discrimination-on the basis of gender and disability-further complicated by caste, class, ethnic and religious backgrounds. As a result, identities and stories become complex and layered. The issues of persons with disabilities are often seen through a welfare approach in laws, programmes and policies. A similar charity-tinted lens is employed by educational books and media texts and a basic reading of these shows how the mildest physical and psycho-social disabilities are viewed as 'abnormal'. The 'incomplete, disabled' body is either pitiable and asexual or superhero-like in its desirability. One must highlight, however, that some ads and films in recent times have made efforts to handle subjects and stories with the dignity they deserve. It is not uncommon that such material arises out of a well-read and sensitive approach to the production process, often also participation by a person with disability which may inform the content, lend perspective and a certain 'everydayness' to so called 'out-of-ordinary' stories. This paper briefly maps the linkages between gender and physical disability as observed in Bollywood films, TV serials and ads and tries to understand the gaps in perspective that result in the repeated production of patronizing, sexist and/or 'able-ist' media images. It uses examples from the author's experience of filming four disabled women in New Delhi for a documentary on disability and sexuality, and deliberates upon how the subjectivity of the filmmaker and the participation of the subjects have an impact on the process and end product. Subsequently, it discusses the response of the audience to the film and the link between media image and reception of identities.

Disability has been portrayed in cinema for many years and is still a sensitive topic open for discourse on how it objectifies and exploits a ‘different’ body. The release of Tod Browning’s film Freaks in 1930 and its subsequent 30-year-ban perfectly illustrate what intense feelings and perceptions our society had of the notion of disability at that time. The 1930s Victorian audience was outraged by the depiction of the ‘real’ disabled actors’ bodies. It was equally unprepared for the fact that the film follows the everyday backstage life of the circus show’s disabled performers and their relationships. Furthermore, in the movie ‘freaks’ collectively disfigure the only ‘able-bodied’ star amongst them, which had only intensified the adverse reaction (Larsen and Haller, 2002). Works by Michel Foucault, a 20th-century French philosopher, allow interpreting the representation of a disabled body and how it became an ‘object and target of power’ (Rabinow, 1984). His concepts of sexuality and medicine, alongside with works by other critics, will be used to analyse the approach to disability in such films like The Elephant Man (1980) by David Lynch and I Don’t Want to Talk About It (1993) by María Luisa Bemberg.

Eva Zamojska, “A cage without a door and a key”. Analysis of cognitive and ethical aspects of selected film and literary depictions of people with disabilities. Interdisciplinary Contexts of Special Pedagogy, No. 16, Poznań 2017. Pp. 145-162. Adam Mickiewicz University Press. ISSN 2300-391X The aim of my paper is to analyse the cognitive and ethical aspects of selected literary and film depictions of disabilities. Based on theoretical and methodological assumptions of sociology of literature and critical discourse analysis, I set out to demonstrate how selected literary and film works depict situations and problems related to social inclusion of people with disabilities. I focus on two questions: 1) How do artistic creations build able people’s knowledge of the social situation and position of people with disabilities? 2) What ethical problems can such depic-

The arts can counter powerful cultural narratives that regulate the lives and bodies of disabled people. But, the performing arts practices that disabled people typically participate in are themselves enmeshed within such problematic narratives. As a result they can play a role in reproducing stigmatised identities and inequitable social relations. In some international contexts, conflicting narratives of disability have meant that the relationship between different areas of arts practice has been either non-existent or fraught with tensions. In this paper, we suggest that the performing arts can contribute significantly to the vision and aspirations articulated in New Zealand’s Disability Strategy if different areas of practice find common ground on which to engage in dialogue and work in coalition. This paper is a reflective report on Re-storying Disability Through the Arts, an event that aimed to provide a space for productive conversation between students, researchers, artists, educators and practitioners with different involvements or interests in disability arts (broadly conceived). It begins with a story that introduces some of the tensions this event evoked. This is followed by a critical commentary that unpacks these tensions, examining the three exam ples of community-based arts practice that were presented. In each instance we identify the ways in which these different forms of performance engage in a strategy of re-storying disability. The paper concludes by identifying some of the key issues that arose in the discussion that ended Re-storying Disability and from our reflection on the event. These include pressing structural issues and questions for consideration by those involved in disability arts in Aotearoa New Zealand.