Disability has been portrayed in cinema for many years and is still a sensitive topic open for discourse on how it objectifies and exploits a ‘different’ body. The release of Tod Browning’s film Freaks in 1930 and its subsequent 30-year-ban perfectly illustrate what intense feelings and perceptions our society had of the notion of disability at that time. The 1930s Victorian audience was outraged by the depiction of the ‘real’ disabled actors’ bodies. It was equally unprepared for the fact that the film follows the everyday backstage life of the circus show’s disabled performers and their relationships. Furthermore, in the movie ‘freaks’ collectively disfigure the only ‘able-bodied’ star amongst them, which had only intensified the adverse reaction (Larsen and Haller, 2002). Works by Michel Foucault, a 20th-century French philosopher, allow interpreting the representation of a disabled body and how it became an ‘object and target of power’ (Rabinow, 1984). His concepts of sexuality and medicine, alongside with works by other critics, will be used to analyse the approach to disability in such films like The Elephant Man (1980) by David Lynch and I Don’t Want to Talk About It (1993) by María Luisa Bemberg.

Eva Zamojska, “A cage without a door and a key”. Analysis of cognitive and ethical aspects of selected film and literary depictions of people with disabilities. Interdisciplinary Contexts of Special Pedagogy, No. 16, Poznań 2017. Pp. 145-162. Adam Mickiewicz University Press. ISSN 2300-391X The aim of my paper is to analyse the cognitive and ethical aspects of selected literary and film depictions of disabilities. Based on theoretical and methodological assumptions of sociology of literature and critical discourse analysis, I set out to demonstrate how selected literary and film works depict situations and problems related to social inclusion of people with disabilities. I focus on two questions: 1) How do artistic creations build able people’s knowledge of the social situation and position of people with disabilities? 2) What ethical problems can such depic-

DRAFT syllabus for team-taught Doctoral Seminar in Interdisciplinary Disability Studies. Course description. Like the fictions of gender and race, disability is a cultural and social formation that sorts bodies and minds into desirable (normal) and undesirable (abnormal, sick) categories. Regimes of representation in literature, art, music, theater, film, and popular culture—the ways that bodies and minds constructed as disabled are depicted—both reflect and shape cultural understandings of nonconforming identities and extraordinary bodies, affecting the lived experience of people understood as disabled, often in negative ways. Drawing on examples from the arts and popular culture, this course will interrogate the many ways disability identity has been confined to rigid and unproductive social, political, and aesthetic categories. It will also explore a significant counter-tradition in which disability is seen as a significant artistic resource and a desirable way of being in the world. Topics will include: the medical and social models of disability; narratives of disability; disability and performance; disability writing (memoir and fiction); narratives of overcoming; the histories and cultures of autism, deafness, blindness, intellectual disability, and madness. We will pay particular attention to the intersection of disability with other more familiar tropes of human disqualification, including race, gender, and sexuality.