A HOME in Las Vegas has been searched in connection to the death of Tupac Shakur, cops say.

Tupac, whose killing remains unsolved, was shot just one block from the Vegas Strip in 1996 and died a week later.

Officials confirmed to local CBS affiliate KLAS that the investigation occurred on Monday as they continue to seek answers in the rapper's shooting death.

A search was carried out at a home in Henderson, Nevada, according to KLAS.

No arrest has been made in the case.

The gangsta rap icon - famed for his hit Ghetto Gospel - died six days after being struck by four bullets from a handgun.

Hours earlier Tupac, 25, and his entourage had watched boxer Mike Tyson fight Bruce Seldon at the MGM Grand casino.

In the lobby afterward, Tupac and his crew - some of whom were associated with the Los Angeles Bloods gang - attacked Orlando Anderson, aka Baby Lane, after Pac threw the first punch.

Anderson was part of the South Side Compton Crips gang.

Anderson, who was later gunned down in a separate gang-related shooting in May 1998, was considered the prime suspect in Tupac's killing but denied it before he died.

Tupac died of his wounds on September 13, 1996.

POSSIBLE NEW EVIDENCE

The shooting has gone unsolved for close to three decades.

The search comes as it had been claimed that cops were ignoring potential new evidence from the last surviving gang member involved in the murder.

Former Crips gangster Keefe D - who has previously confessed to his role in the shooting of Tupac - made a bombshell claim in May, saying that FBI agents told him that another famous hip hop star paid a $1million fee for Tupac's assassination, but it was then stolen by a middleman.

Keefe claims in a newly released interview clip that FBI agents and the US attorney’s officers told him that a gangster named Eric Von Zip - known as Zip - stole the million bucks he and his crew of South Side Crips were allegedly owed for hunting down Tupac in Las Vegas in September 1996.

Now, a source close to the investigation said that despite the latest admission from Keefe, detectives are not following up with FBI agents and they will not be bringing in Keefe for questioning or even an informal interview in the future.

Keefe, who has previously claimed he was in the car when his nephew Orlando Anderson shot Tupac, made his latest comments in a YouTube interview with Vlad TV.

A source told The U.S. Sun that Las Vegas Metro Police detectives had been contacted by several people who hoped for a re-examination of the case with Keefe’s new claims.

But it is unclear if the search of the home is related to Keefe's claim.