The Devrekani Massif in the northern part of the Central Pontides (Northern Turkey) provides important clues to the regional tectonics and geodynamic processes associated with Jurassic high grade metamorphic conditions. This study reports new paragenetic assemblages, mineral compositions, whole-rock geochemistry and 40 Ar-39 Ar geochronological data from the paragneisses in the massif, and, discusses the P-T conditions and geodynamic implications of the Jurassic metamorphism during continental extension in the Central Pontides. Upper am-phibolite to lower granulite facies paragneisses form one of the main lithological units in the massif. Within these, there are five different mineral parageneses with diagnostic mineral assemblages of: quartz, K-feldspar (An 0-1 Ab 4-26 Or 73-96), plagioclase (An 18-35), biotite [X Phl : 0.28-0.57; Mg/(Mg + Fe 2+): 0.33-0.61], sillimanite, cordierite [Mg/(Mg + Fe 2+): 0.48-0.71] and garnet (Alm 43-80 Grs 0-18 Prp 5-23 And 0-4 Sps 10-33) with minor hercy-nite. Based on Na-in-Crd thermometry and GASP barometry results, the peak metamorphic conditions are 775 ± 25 °C and 6 ± 1 kbar in the massif. The field relations, petrography and bulk chemical data suggest that the paragneisses, derived from shale-wackestone and pelitic sedimentary protoliths, are typical rock lithologies of an active continental margin. They display enrichments in LILE over HFSE, coupled with negative Nb and Ti anomalies, which are geochemical signatures of subduction-related sources. It is likely that the peak meta-morphism took place during the Middle-Upper Jurassic period (ca. 174-156 Ma), suggesting that the meta-morphic rocks cooled to 300-350 °C at ca. 156 Ma. The mineral assemblages reveal that the prograde history passed from sillimanite zone conditions up to the cordierite-garnet-K-feldspar zone. The petrological and geo-chronological data indicate that the protoliths are related to multiple sources such as volcano-sedimentary successions. We conclude that the Devrekani Massif represents the products of pre-Jurassic sedimentation, and Permo-Carboniferous continental arc magmatism, overprinted by Jurassic metamorphism.

The Devrekani Massif in the northern part of the Central Pontides (Northern Turkey) provides important clues to the regional tectonics and geodynamic processes associated with Jurassic high grade metamorphic conditions. This study reports new paragenetic assemblages, mineral compositions, whole-rock geochemistry and 40Ar-39Ar geochronological data from the paragneisses in the massif, and, discusses the P–T conditions and geodynamic implications of the Jurassic metamorphism during continental extension in the Central Pontides. Upper amphibolite to lower granulite facies paragneisses form one of the main lithological units in the massif. Within these, there are five different mineral parageneses with diagnostic mineral assemblages of: quartz, K-feldspar (An0-1Ab4-26Or73-96), plagioclase (An1835), biotite [(XPhl: 0.28-0.57; Mg/(Mg+Fe2+): 0.33-0.61)], sillimanite, cordierite [(Mg/(Mg+Fe2+): 0.48-0.71)] and garnet (Alm43-80Grs0-18Prp5-23And0-4Sps10-33) with minor hercynite. Based on Na-i...

In the northern part of the Central Pontides (N Turkey) there are different metamorphic rocks exposed, notably the Devrekani metamorphic rocks. Here, upper amphibolite-lower granulite facies metamorphic rocks contain predominantly paragneiss, orthogneiss and metacarbonate, and to a lesser extent, amphibolite and quartzite, with cross-cutting aplite, pegmatite and granite veins. This is the first report of these rocks and includes new data on the petrochem-istry, geochronology and metamorphic evolution of the Devrekani orthogneisses from the Central Pontides. The orthogneisses show five different mineral parageneses with the characteristic mineral assemblage quartz + K-feldspar + plagioclase + biotite ± hornblende ± opaque (± ilmenite and ± magnetite), and accessory minerals (zircon, sphene and apa-tite). These metamorphic rocks exhibit generally granoblastic, lepidogranoblastic and nematolepidogranoblastic with locally migmatitic and relic micrographic textures. They have well-developed centimeter-spaced gneissic banding and display gneissose structure with symmetric, asymmetric and irregular folds. The petrographic features, mineralogical assemblages and weak migmatization reflect high temperature conditions. Thermometric calculations in the orthogneisses indicate meta-morphic temperatures reached 744 ± 33 °C. Field relations, petrography and petrochemistry suggest that the orthogneisses have predominantly granodioritic and some granitic protoliths, that show features of I-type, medium to high-potassic calc-alkaline volcanic arc granitoids. The orthogneisses have high contents of LILEs and low contents of HFSEs with negative Nb and Ti anomalies, which are typical of subduction-related magmas. The orthogneisses also show significant LREE enrichment relative to HREE with negative Eu anomalies (Eu N /Eu* = 0.33–1.07) with La N / Lu N = 6.98–20.47 values. Based on U-Pb zircon dating data, the protoliths are related to Permo-Carboniferous (316– 252 Ma) magmatism. It is likely that peak metamorphism took place during the Jurassic as reflected by the U-Pb zircon ages (199–158 Ma) and also 40 Ar/ 39 Ar from hornblende/biotite (163–152 Ma). The four biotite 40 Ar/ 39 Ar average ages from the rock samples are ca. 156 Ma, suggesting that the metamor-phic rocks cooled to 350–400 °C at ca. 156 Ma. Conclusively, the Devrekani metamorphic rocks can be ascribed as products of Permo-Carboniferous continental arc magmatism overprinted by Jurassic metamorphism in the northern Central Pontides.

In the Pulur complex (Sakarya Zone, Eastern Pontides, Turkey) a low-grade tectonometamorphic unit (Doğankavak) is exposed in three tectonic windows beneath a complex medium-pressure high-temperature metamorphic unit of late Carboniferous age. The thrust plane between both units is transgressively covered by Liassic conglomerates. The Doğankavak unit comprises a sequence of metabasites with MORB-type chemical compositions and phyllites, with subordinate calcareous phyllites, marbles, quarzofeldspathic schists and metacherts. This sequence is interpreted as a former accretionary complex related to the consumption of the Palaeotethys. Mineral parageneses in the metabasites allow for the distinction of two domains with slightly different peak metamorphic conditions, i.e. 375–425 °C/0.5–0.8 GPa (greenschist facies) and 400–470 °C/0.6–1.1 GPa (albite-epidote amphibolite facies). The age of metamorphism is constrained at ~ 260 Ma (early Late Permian) by two Rb-Sr mineral-whole rock ages (hornblende, phengite) and one 40Ar/39Ar single step total fusion age (phengite). In conjunction with previous data on other accretionary complexes in the Sakarya zone in Northern Turkey, the data presented in this study suggest a continuous subduction of the Palaeotethys at least from Early/Late Permian to Late Triassic and a discontinuous preservation of accretion complexes in both space and time.