Guildford, UK - Thursday 7th December 2006 - Get ready for complete and total domination. Electronic Arts (NASAQ: ERTS) today announced that Burnout Dominator is in development exclusively for the PlayStation®2 computer entertainment system and PSP® (PlayStation®Portable) system.

Burnout Dominator is an all-new installment of the legendary and multi-award winning Burnout series, loaded with intense racing action and dozens of retina-searing World Tour events. Burnout Dominator challenges gamers to face off against a series of hot-blooded rivals in brutal tests of aggressive driving techniques where performing burnouts gives you the advantage and multiplies your score potential. For the ultimate nerve-wracking experience, Burnout Dominator takes you to the very edge of control, punishing the smallest mistakes and rewarding drivers for taking outrageous risks.

"The series was born on the PlayStation 2, and Burnout Dominator is about celebrating the essence of Burnout," said Nick Channon, senior producer of Burnout Dominator. "Burnout Dominator focuses on the reckless skill-based racing and fear of crashing that fuelled the first games."

Burnout Dominator will release in 2007 under the EA brand and is developed by EA's UK Studio team in Guildford, UK. For more information about the Burnout franchise, please visit http://ea.com or our press Web site at www.electronicarts.co.uk/press

About Electronic Arts

Electronic Arts Inc. (EA), headquartered in Redwood City, California, is the world's leading interactive entertainment software company. Founded in 1982, the company develops, publishes, and distributes interactive software worldwide for videogame systems, personal computers, cellular handsets and the Internet. Electronic Arts markets its products under four brand names: EA SPORTS, EA, EA SPORTS BIG and POGO. In fiscal 2006, EA posted revenue of $2.95 billion and had 27 titles that sold more than one million copies. EA's homepage and online game site is www.ea.com. More information about EA's products and full text of press releases can be found on the Internet at http://info.ea.com.

Electronic Arts, EA, EA SPORTS, EA SPORTS BIG, POGO and Burnout are trademarks or registered trademarks of Electronic Arts Inc. in the U.S. and/or other countries. "PlayStation" and "PSP" are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.