Below is a list of all the optional photos in the game, sorted by the Episode they are found in.

Episode 1: Chrysalis

Loading

Play

Episode one has 10 pictures to collect scatted in different locations throughout the game.

At the beginning of the game, after class has ended, check the desk in the center of the room to see a photo opportunity.

After making it outside of the main building, the next photo opportunity is in front of the Jeremiah Blackwell statue facing back towards the school.

After taking photo 2 you should turn around and see a group of skateboarders. Go to them and talk to Justin. No matter which option is chosen in this first encounter he will call you a poser and stop talking. Rewind time and speak to Justin again, this time using the new conversation options to convince him you are not a poser. He will ask if you want to see a noseslide or tre flip, the only way to get the photo is by picking "tre flip". Once that option is chosen, the skater will fall off his skateboard, which can be photographed. Once you have the picture you can simple rewind time and watch the other trick.

The next photo can be found in front of Max's dorm building. Cross the yard from the entry way and you should see Kate sitting on a bench alone. In front of her should be a tree with a squirrel to the side which you can take a picture of.

The next photo can be taken once inside Max's room. On the right as you enter the room should be a small mirror in which Max takes a picture of herself.

This photo can be taken once you finish talking to Juliet and gain access to Victoria's room. As you enter the room there will be a collage of pictures to the right. Walk up to the pictures and you are given the option to mess the pictures up, once done you can take your picture.

Once you leave the dorm building with the flash drive you will see Alyssa get hit with a football. Using your rewind abilities save Alyssa and the football will hit the window instead. Once the window is broken walk to it and you will be able to take a photo.

The next photo is taken in the car park. Before talking to Warren go to the right side of the area to a large Winnebago (RV). Walking to its dirty window and you will have a option to draw on the window. Once done you can take the photo.

After leaving Chloe's house you go to the light house with her. Before walking up the hill, turn around and go to the bottom of the path. As you walk back there will be a large rock with a bird standing on top, approach the bird and take your photo.

Once you reach the light house you will see Chloe sitting on a bench. Walk up to her back and it will have a option of taking her picture.

A video showing these 10 locations can be seen below:

Episode 2: Out of Time

Loading

Play

Found inside the Girls' Dormitories. When returning Kate's book, take a photo of her pet to get this picture.

Found in the second area, the Dormitories - Morning. Head to the right side of the area, by the maintenance room. There is a bench and garbage can here. Interact with it to place some food on the bench and lure the squirrel over. Make sure to step away from the bench or else he won't come. Once he hops on the bench, move in and take the picture.

Picture 3 is found at the diner. Simply look above the entrance to see a giant whale sign that you can take a photo of.

The fourth picture is found behind the Diner. Walk around to the back until you reach the fence, and on the other side is a dog you can take a picture of.

The fifth picture is inside the washroom of the Diner. Enter and look on the mirror to see some graffiti you can take a picture of.

Picture six is located shortly after reaching the junkyard. Head to the front-left corner of the wrecked bus to take a picture of it.

The seventh picture is found in the peaceful clearing at the junkyard. There is a deer here, and as you approach it will walk a small distance then stop. Follow it to be able to take a picture.

Photo eight is taken after the section with the gun. After Max regains consciousness, stand up and walk to the right side of Chloe, where you can snap a picture of her.

The ninth photo takes a bit of work. Once you are back at the school, go to the science lab and speak to Warren. Tell him to use one of the ingredients and it won't work. Rewind time, and instead of speaking to him, talk to the teacher. Ask her about the experiment and she will bring up Chlorine. Now go to Warren, tell him to use Chlorine, then wait a few seconds and you will be able to snap a picture of him.

The final photo is taken in your classroom. After talking with the teacher, walk in and you will see a student starring out the window. Walk up behind her to snap a picture.

A video for all of the optional photos in Episode 2: Out of Time is found below.

Episode 3: Chaos Theory

Below is a list of all the optional photos in Episode 3 of Life is Strange.

Loading

Play

After speaking with Taylor in the showers, head to Victoria's room. Inside you will find an action figure statue sitting on her shelf. Shine your light at it for several seconds to cause to glow and snag the picture.

As soon as you head outside, go right and you will see a squirrel on a bench. As you approach he runs away, so stand beside the bench and rewind time to bring him back then take his picture.

Once you are in the school, go to the science classroom. Turn on the fishtank to take a picture of it.

The fourth picture is found near the third. In the back of the science classroom is a skeleton. Take a picture of it!

After you enter the principals office Chloe sits in his chair. When she does, you can take a picture of her.

Once you have changed your clothes, and leave Chloe's room, head into the bathroom. Look in the mirror to take the sixth photo.

When you head downstairs, look in the livingroom to find a bird sitting on a cabinet. Scare it once to cause it to fly to the fireplace. Before going up to it again, go to the window that's to the left of the fireplace and open it. Now go to the bird and scare it again and it will fly outside. Leave the house through the back sliding door, and you can find the bird sitting on the back fence, allowing you to take a picture of it.

Outside the Diner is a trucker. Speak with him and he will tell you of his truck. Rewind time and bring up his truck to him and he will be so impressed he'll allow you to take a picture of his truck.

Found right near picture eight. Around the side of the diner is a dead bird with a black vortex of ants around it. Snap a photo of it.

When you go back in time, immediately grab the camera on the counter when you gain control of max. Snap a picture of Chloe and her father to gain the final photo.

A video for all of the Optional Photos in Episode 3: Chaos Theory is found below.