See other formats

PLANTS, ENDANGERED SPECIES - U.S. 94th Congress, 1st Session -------- House Document No. 94-51 PROPERTY OF DEPT. OF INTERIOR NATIONAL PARK SERVICE SOUTHEAST REGION REPORT ox ENDANGERED AND THREATENED PLANT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES Presented to the Congress of the United States of America by the Secretary, Smithsonian Institution LIBRARY GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS NATIONAL PARK Serial No. 94-A Printed for the use of the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 5-265 O WASHINGTON : 1975 flOlSBTW 30 .TOO 30 YTfl3S0fl3 iiVPV ^ JAMOITW1 COMMITTEE ON MERCHANT MARINE AND FISHERIES LEONOR K. (MRS. JOHN B.) SULLIVAN, Missouri, Chairman THOMAS L. ASHLEY, Ohio JOHN D. DINGELL. Michigan THOMAS N. DOWNING, Virginia PAUL G. ROGERS, Florida JOHN M. MURPHY, New York WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina ROBERT L. LEGGETT, California MARIO BIAGGI, New York GLENN M. ANDERSON, California E. (KIKA) de la GARZA, Texas RALPH H. METCALFE, Illinois JOHN B. BREAUX, Louisiana FRED B. ROONEY, Pennsylvania PAUL S. SARBANES, Maryland BO GINN, Georgia GERRY E. STUDDS, Massachusetts DAVID R. BOWEN, Mississippi JOSHUA EILBERG, Pennsylvania RON de LUGO, Virgin Islands CARROLL HUBBARD, Jr., Kentucky DON BONKER, Washington LES AuCOIN, Oregon NORMAN E. D'AMOURS, New Hampshire JERRY M. PATTERSON, California LEO C. ZEFERETTI, New York JAMES L. OBERSTAR, Minnesota Ernest J. Corrado, Chief Counsel Frances Still, Chief Clerk Ned I'. Everett, Counsel Frank M. Potter, Jr., Counsel Richard N. Sharood, Minority Counsel Charles A. Bedell, Minority Counsel PHILIP E. RUPPE, Michigan CHARLES A. MOSHER, Ohio PAUL N. McCLOSKEY, Jr., California GENE SNYDER, Kentucky EDWIN B. FORSYTHE, New Jersey PIERRE S. (PETE) ou PONT. Delaware DAVID C. TREEN, Louisiana JOEL PRITCHARD, Washington DON YOUNG, Alaska ROBERT E. BAUMAN, Maryland NORMAN F. LENT, New York MATTHEW J. RINALDO, New Jersey DAVID F. EMERY, Maine LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., January 9, 1971+- Hon. Carl Albert, The Speaker ■, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. DEAR Mr. SPEAKER: In accordance with Section 12 of Public Law 93-205, the Endangered Species Act of 1973, there is trans- mitted herewith the report of my review and recommendations. Sincerely yours, S. Dillon Ripley, Secretary. Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2012 with funding from LYRASIS Members and Sloan Foundation http://archive.org/details/reportonendangerOOunse Report on Endangered and Threatened Plant Species of the United States Presented to the Congress of the United States of America by the Secretary, Smithsonian Institution 15 December 1974 FOREWORD The fact that few people are aware of the urgent need for preventing in- discriminate destruction of the vegetation of this country makes the presenta- tion of this report indeed timely. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 and re- cently published reports on the environment reflect a growing national and even international concern over the current and future state of the biosphere--that part of the earth in which life exists. The contemporary concept of human progress, based on materialistic values and exhibited in steel and concrete, seems to overshadow the more pressing needs of sensible preservation of natural resources and judicious utilization of the land itself. Many critical areas that contained the rarest of plants already have been destroyed, thus preventing future generations from ever seeing some of nature's treasures. All animals are dependent on plants for food and survival. Once a spe- cies of plant is extinct, the potential contained in that germ or gene pool is lost forever. A diversity of plant species is required to supply human neces- sities and to maintain an ecological stability in the biosphere. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Public Law 93-205, approved December 28, 1973) directed the Smithsonian Institution to prepare a list of endangered and threatened plant species, to review methods of adequately conserving these species, and to report the Institution's recommendations to the Congress. This report provides lists of endangered, threatened, recently extinct, and exploited species of native plants of the United States. In the continen- tal United States, this list comprises about 10 percent of the flora, 2099 species, with 100 species recently extinct or possibly extinct, 761 species endangered, and 1238 species threatened. Preliminary lists were compiled under the direction of Dr. Dale W. Jenkins, former Director of the Smithsonian's Ecology Program, with the assistance of the staff of the Department of Botany at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History, particularly Dr. John J. Wurdack. The Hawaiian list of recently extinct, endangered, and threatened species was compiled by Dr. F. Raymond Fosberg with the assistance of other Smithsonian and Hawaiian botanists. Many distinguished botanists and organi- zations, listed in pages 192 - 198, also have aided in the preparation and re- view of the lists, and the versatility of the SELGEM computer system of the National Museum of Natural History made possible the generation of the computer printouts included in this report. The entire program was under the direction of Dr. Edward S. Ayensu, Chairman of the Department of Botany. With staff support from the Office of Endangered Species and International Activities of the Department of Interior, a workshop was held by the Smithsonian Institution at River Farm of the American Horticultural Society. Outstanding botanists and representatives of various organizations reviewed and improved the preliminary lists, helped prepare recommendations for conserving plant species, and considered the possibility of new or amended legislation. This report represents the beginning of an effort to keep accurate records of the endangered and threatened plant species of the United States. We are, however, mindful of the fact that the status of plants on the lists will change and that the lists, accordingly, should be revised on a regular basis. Scientific names, which include genus, species, subspecies, and varieties, are used in this report because common names are not available for many of the plants, particularly the rarer or lesser known ones. In addition, the use of common names may cause confusion because they frequently refer to an entire group of species, or even to different and unrelated genera. Moreover, the same species of plants may have different local names in different geographi- cal regions. It is the hope of botanists that an attempt will be made some- day to standardize the common names of plants. The report and the lists will, we hope, be of value to all people interested in conserving the nation's biological heritage, and to those concerned with the exploitation, development, management, and preservation of all natural resources in this country. S. DILLON RIPLEY Secretary Smithsonian Institution CONTENTS Foreword i Recommendations 1 Summary (Table) 11 Report 12 Introduction 12 Value of Maintaining Diversity of Plant Species 14 Status of Lists 16 Definitions of Plant Status 16 Development of Lists 18 Value of Lists 21 Future Plans 22 Causes of Rarity and Endangerment 22 Preservation 2S Prevention of the Destruction of Plant Habitats 25 Monitoring and Research 27 Prevention of Commercial Exploitation 29 List of Commercially Exploited Species in the Continental United States 31 List of Recently Extinct and Possibly Extinct Species of Higher Plants in the Continental United States 38 List of Endangered Species in the Continental United States 48 List of Threatened Species in the Continental United States 68 State Lists of Endangered and Threatened Species in the Continental United States 99 List of Endangered, Threatened, and Recently Extinct Species of Hawaii 164 Workshop on Endangered or Threatened Higher Plants of the United States 192 Coordination 199 iv RECOMMENDATIONS 1. Preservation of endangered and threatened species of plants in their native habitat should be adopted as the best method of ensuring their survival. Culti- vation or artificial propagation of these species is an unsatisfactory alterna- tive to in situ perpetuation and should be used only as a last resort, when extinction appears certain, with the purpose of re-establishing the species in its natural habitat. Habitat preservation must be given the highest priority in all conserva- tion activities, particularly when dealing with the critical habitats of en- dangered species. Modification or destruction of critical habitats by human activities could result not only in a further reduction in population and dis- tribution, but also in restriction of population expansion and recovery. Transplantation and artificial cultivation should be a last resort, always with the ultimate objective of re-establishing the species in its natural habi- tat. Attempts to protect individual plants by fencing, for example, without preservation of the habitat or ecosystem upon which they depend will not pro- vide successful perpetuation. Protection and preservation of critical habitats and populations can be given high priority by landmark designations, conservation easements, acquisi- tion, the institution of firm penalty procedures, and the habitats' designation as Natural Landmarks and Research Natural Areas. 2. The species of endangered and threatened plants that occur on federal and state lands should be mapped and given continued protection. More specific attention should be given by federal departments and agencies to the preven- tion of destruction or modification of critical habitats of endangered and threatened flora in accordance with the Endangered Species Act of 1973 and the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. The species of endangered and threatened plants on federal and state lands should be determined and exact locations should be mapped and made known to the appropriate authorities. The Federal government could set a prime example of good policy by the protection of critical habitats of endangered plants and animals within the vast lands under its domain. It would be advisable for the executive branch of the Federal government, through the Council on Environmental Quality, to give greater attention to endangered and threatened plant species in the reviews of environmental impact analyses and in the statements issued under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. Federal agencies that are involved in land management (including the Bureau of Land Management, the Fish and Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Out- door Recreation, the National Park Service, the Forest Service, the Soil Con- servation Service, the Atomic Energy Commission, the Department of Defense) should be reminded that endangered and threatened plant species and their sup- porting habitats are basic natural resources in the agencies' land use plans and in their natural resource surveys or inventories. State and local land planning agencies and similar bodies should be encouraged always to include in their guidelines on planning legislation a list of endangered and threatened plant species and the supporting habitats. 2 3. In accordance with Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the Secretary of the Interior should review the lists in this report and publish proposed lists of endangered and threatened plants in the Federal Register. • The Secretary of the Interior is required by Section 4 to determine, after consultation, the endangered or threatened status of plant species and to pub- lish the resulting lists in the Federal Register. Official publication of the lists of endangered and threatened plants is needed to prevent commercial exploitation which may ensue once the lists be- come public knowledge. After such publication, under the provisions of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 the endangered and threatened plant species will be protected from exploitation or destruction until some of the most endan- gered can be given the special attention required to prevent extinction. Pub- lication of the lists is necessary also for those agencies and groups involved in the preparation of environmental impact statements in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. 4. The Secretary of the Interior is advised to ensure that the commercially exploited species of plants in this report are given urgent protection. Ap- propriate government agencies should be alerted and existing laws should be fully enforced. The international Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, signed by the United States, gives authority to the Secretary of the Interior to protect fully those species presently listed in the appendices of the Convention. In the United States this list already in- cludes all species of Cactaceae, Orchidaceae, and ginseng {Panax quinque folium) All appropriate federal and state agencies should be notified of those species listed by the Convention and of existing laws pertaining to their pro- tection. 5. It is recommended that the list of the species of endangered and threatened plants in this report should be submitted by the Secretary of the Interior to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora for inclusion in Appendix III. This listing will enable the Secretary of the Interior^ acting as the United States Management Authority to the Con- ventions to acquire lands for the preservation of endangered species of plants. Trade in endangered and threatened plant species of the United States, whether international, interstate, or local, should be prohibited by presenting the lists of those species in this report for inclusion in Appendix III of the Convention. Article XVI of the Convention on the procedure for listing species in Appendix III states that any party's Management Authority may at any time submit to the Secretariat a list of species which it identifies as being sub- ject to regulation within its jurisdiction, for the purpose of preventing or restricting exploitation, and requiring the cooperation of other parties in the control of trade. 6. Since protection alone may not be sufficient for the survival of some pop- ulations of endangered and threatened species, monitoring of population levels is needed. For declining populations, research is necessary to determine the causes of rarity and to ascertain what can be done to save the species. Protection of plant habitats may be insufficient for the preservation of some populations of threatened and endangered species. Consequently, it is essential that monitoring of populations be undertaken to determine trends in their levels and viability. Monitoring of plant populations includes observa- tion of population size (decline or increase), condition of habitats, reproduc- tion, and any changes in geographical distribution. Federal and state agencies involved in land management should monitor pop- ulation levels in areas reserved, protected, or otherwise identified as refugia for one or more threatened or endangered species. These agencies should con- duct scientifically based management programs, when necessary, to perpetuate the population. State agencies should be encouraged to conduct similar moni- toring and management programs, including cost-sharing arrangements, for threatened and endangered populations on protected non- federal lands. Research essential to development of management programs should be con- ducted where species continue to decline, and necessary management programs based on this research should be planned and carried out to maintain or increase population levels and viability. Federal agencies and departments with research and/or land management pro- grams already underway should be encouraged to conduct or sponsor expanded re- search on the biology of endangered and threatened species, investigation that is necessary to appraise the survival status of these species and to provide guidance for management in order to maintain, perpetuate, or restore the populations . 7. A "Registry of Endangered and Threatened Plants" should be established on a permanent basis to continue to collect, evaluate, and update all pertinent information available to interested national and international organizations. A national registry office would be required to maintain such as register on a permanent basis, and to collect, evaluate, synthesize, and publish infor- mation on all endangered and threatened plant species, commencing with the vas- cular plants of the United States, including Hawaii and Alaska. The registry and coordination should include central card files and maps, a specialized li- brary, use of a computer, and a small staff of experts. The register would require continual updating of information on the location, status, habitat re- quirements, reproductive behavior, population size, and commercial and private exploitation data on endangered and threatened species. The register should be available to the public. 46-265 O - 75 - 2 8. The lists of endangered and threatened plants should be given wide expo- sure and publicity. Colored illustrations should be displayed in public places, in publications, and on postage stamps. Interested organizations should be en- couraged to assist in publicizing the need for protection and preservation of endayigered and threatened species of plants. The lists and illustrations of endangered plants should be given wide exposure and publicity, and copies should be made available to appropriate or- ganizations and to the public at large. Colored illustrations of endangered plant species of the United States should be prepared for general distribution and for prominent display at parks, nature reserves, museums, and tourist cen- ters. They should be sent to botanical gardens, to horticultural, gardening, and conservation groups, and to educational establishments from elementary v schools through colleges and universities. Displays of this kind have been successful in Europe. For a number of years the Swiss have posted in public places colored pictures of rare and en- dangered species that are protected by law. Since the rich alpine flora is a great attraction and temptation to tourists, the intent of such displays is to make the public aware of the tenuous existence maintained by some populations of rare plants that people encounter. In 1974 the Botanical Society of the British Isles published a poster in color, depicting 20 of the rarest endangered species in Great Britain. Simul- taneously, a succinctly worded handbill in color was published and distributed to members of the Society. These items now are available to the public for a minimal charge and apparently are popular as decorative materials. The larger area of the United States and the number of endangered and threatened species affords an opportunity for the preparation of regional posters that would emphasize the endangered species of particular states and regions where endemism is high such as California and Hawaii, and those of selected natural areas. In addition, garden and horticultural groups should be asked to encourage and cooperate with local and state authorities in efforts to publicize these species. The Federal government might consider the value of the publicity that would be afforded by a series of postage stamps portraying endangered and threatened plant species, as done by several other countries. In the United States only one listed species, the Lost Franklinia (Franklinia alatamaha) , is shown on a stamp, issued in 1969. 9. No new federal legislation is required at this time. However 3 after a reasonable period, a review of the effectiveness of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 may be required to provide better protection to the endangered and threatened plant species. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 appears to provide adequately for the protection of listed endangered and threatened species of wildlife and fish, but it differs for plants as follows: (1) The term "species" includes plant subspecies only and does not include varieties. (2) The Secretary of the Interior does not have the authority to acquire land for the purposes of con- serving endangered and threatened plants that are not listed in the appendices to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. (3) The Act does not prohibit the "taking" of endangered and threatened plant species in the United States. 10 SUMMARY OF ENDANGERED, THREATENED, AND EXTINCT SPECIES OF NATIVE HIGHER PLANTS OF THE UNITED STATES* Status Continental U. S. (including Alaska) Hawaii species, subspecies, and varieties percent species, subspecies, and varieties percent Endangered Threatened 761 1238 100 3.8 6.1 0.5 639 194 255 29.0 8.8 11.6 Total 2099 10.4 1088 48 9 'Total native flora = 20,000 (United States with Alaska) 2200 (Hawaii) 11 REPORT Introduction Throughout the world much concern for conservation has been concentrated on the preservation of endangered animals, particularly mammals and birds. Only recently have endangered plants been given serious consideration. Red Data Books on endangered animals have been prepared for a number of years by the Sur- vival Service Commission of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) . The volume on birds in the lUCN series is pre- pared by experts from the International Council for Bird Preservation. A Red Data Book, volume 5, on angiosperms was started in 1970. It has been estimated that, of the approximately 300,000 species of plants of the world, over 20,000 are endangered or vulnerable and threatened with extinction by the year 2000. In the United States, the preservation of endangered fish and wildlife was covered by the Endangered Species Acts of 1966 and 1969. These were expanded to include plants in the Endangered Species Act of 1973. A Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora was adopted by a plenipotentiary conference on 3 March 1973 in Washington, D. C, and later signed by the United States. This convention un- dertakes to regulate the export, import, and transit of specimens and products of plant species threatened or not yet threatened with world-wide extinction. This report includes the first national lists of endangered, threatened, recently extinct, and commercially exploited species of native vascular plants of the United States (including the states of Alaska and Hawaii. These endangered and threatened plant species are listed in taxonomic groupings 12 by families and in geographic groupings by states. Recommendations to Congress are presented, and the value of retaining di- verse plant species, causes of rarity, and preservation are discussed. The methods and criteria used in preparing the lists, the present status of the lists, and future needs and plans also are presented. Many species of rare, endangered, and threatened plants grow in severe or unusual habitats and often possess unique qualities that make them parti- cularly valuable to man: they help provide diversity and greater ecological stability, they stock unstable and unusual habitats, they are sources of medi- cines and other chemicals, they are bioindicators of minerals and metal ores, they possess potential value for food crops and horticultural use, and they provide man with sources of aesthetic value. Loss of any species of plant represents an irretrievable loss of unique genetic material or germ plasm that cannot be duplicated and narrows man's future options for his own use of the environment . These lists should be of value to all people involved in the exploitation, development, management, and preservation of private and federal lands. They should also be of value to all agencies involved in preparing environmental impact statements in conformance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. They should be of particular value to land use planners and conser- vationists in designating parks, natural landmarks, monument areas, and pre- served natural areas. The major recommendation made is for the preservation of the habitats of endangered and threatened species of plants. Cultivation or artificial propa- gation is not an acceptable alternative to in situ perpetuation of species. Not only preservation of habitats but also protection of the plants from com- mercial collecting, exploitation, and from overgrazing is recommended. 13 Value of Maintaining Diversity of Plant Species Detailed knowledge about the endangered, threatened, and recently extinct species of plants is urgently needed. Plants are essential to maintenance of life on this planet. They are a basic component of man's environment. The di- verse green plant cover of the earth--trees, shrubs, and wild flowers--is one of the most important features in making man's environment livable, delightful, and beautiful. Even more significant, plants fix solar energy in the form of carbohydrates and are vital sources of food, fiber, shelter, and fuel required for man's very existence. Thus, human beings, as well as domestic and all other species of animals, are dependent on plants for their survival. A wide variety of plant species is essential to the maintenance of the environment in a livable condition in order to prevent wind and water erosion and to aid in developing fertile soil, in storing water, and in maintaining or providing subsurface water. A wide diversity of plant species and populations, there- fore, is required to stock the many different habitats and ecosystems of the earth and is necessary to maintain ecological stability. Man's own monocul- tural system of agriculture has taught him much about the problems of ecolo- gical stability in the need for protection from diseases, insect pests, weeds, depletion of soil nutrients, and similar ecological problems. Each species, subspecies, and variety of plant represents a unique type of biological germ plasm, or gene pool, with special characteristics and values These unique genetic resources are specific and different. When one of these types becomes extinct, the gene pool cannot be duplicated or re-established and is lost forever. Each extinct species narrows man's options in the poten- tial uses of the known or unknown values of each gene pool. Imagine the loss to mankind if the bread mold Penicillium had been eliminated before the dis- covery of the first antibiotic, penicillin, or if cinchona had been destroyed 14 before quinine was discovered as a cure for malaria. A large untapped potential of enormous value to man exists if he preserves the diversity of plant species. It has been estimated that 50,000 new alkaloids can be discovered in plants, including possible cancer cures. New plant medi- cinals and drugs presently are being discovered. Using yams as a natural inter- mediate in the search for cortisone precursors illustrates a valuable short- cut in a normally lengthy and expensive chemical synthesis. An effective mol- luscicide from pokeweed recently was discovered for the control of snails trans- mitting schistosomiasis, a disease that affects over 200 million people. Plants not only produce natural biologically active chemicals such as insecticides but also provide man with the chemical structures to synthesize even more effec- tive chemicals and pesticides. They even indirectly affect research: the attempts to synthesize quinine gave a new impetus to organic chemistry. Development of new and improved food, fiber, and timber crop species is a very important potential. With improved technology, man is able to utilize new species and to improve plant production and yield by genetic selection and the use of biologically active chemicals. Improved use of fertilizers, inte- grated biological control, and use of pesticides will help in alleviating food shortages, now a major and growing world problem. Man will need all of the different types of plant germ plasm possible to increase future food production. In addition to developing untapped potentials, man also must preserve the ancestors of the present crop plants to provide protection against plant di- seases and insect pests and to ensure vigorous and basic stocks for future breeding. The progenitors and relatives of corn, wheat, rice, and similar crops must be preserved in their present genetic state, and they must be pro- tected from cross-breeding and hybridization with newer stocks in order to pre- serve their original values. Some ancestral stocks such as certain progenitors 15 of corn are very rare and some apparently are extinct. The ancestors of fiber, timber, and horticultural plant species also should be preserved. It should be pointed out that many species of rare plants have special' value to man since they are able to grow in unique and difficult places such as serpentine rock, cedar and shale barrens, sand plains, shorelines, rock faces, mountain tops, and flooded areas. Thus, these rare species have special charac- teristics that give them unique value in stocking such habitats. Some rare species also are bioindicators of needed minerals and metal ores. Many rare species, e.g., cacti and orchids, possess known or potential horticultural value. Others, such as ginseng and golden seal, are of medicinal value. In fact, these valuable characteristics often are the very cause of rarity, endangerment , or extinction of many species of plants. Status of Lists These are the first published lists of endangered, threatened, and recent- ly extinct species of native plants of the United States. Because of the neces- sity for meeting a deadline, the lists have been compiled in a relatively short period of time. Excellent cooperation has been received from many taxonomic specialists and local botanists, but the present lists lack the benefit of a thorough and complete review by specialists in all taxonomic groups of plants and by local experts on the flora of certain regions. The lists, therefore, should be considered at the present time as a "snap- shot" of the status of higher plants. This status is changing, knowledge is increasing, and species may be removed or added to the lists, which will con- tinue to be improved and updated. Definitions of Plant Status In determining endangered, threatened, and recently extinct, or possibly 16 extinct status, the entire range of the species or other recognized taxonomic unit is considered. A species that is rare in one area or state is not in- cluded if it is common elsewhere in its range. (In the future, it may be ad- visable to include in the lists interesting disjunct populations and species that have become rare or extinct over a significant part of their range.) Since the status of rarity and endangerment as defined in the Endangered Species Act of 1973 applies primarily to animals, the definitions have been modified slightly for plants, and the following terms and meanings presently are agreed upon by the contributors to this report. Endangered species: those species of plants in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of their ranges. Existence may be en- dangered because of the destruction, drastic modification, or severe curtail- ment of habitat, or because of overexploitation, disease, predation, or even unknown reasons. Plant taxa from very limited areas, e.g., the type localities only, or from restricted fragile habitats usually are considered endangered. Threatened species: those species of plants that are likely to become endangered within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant por- tion of their ranges. This includes species categorized as rare, very rare, or depleted. Recently extinct or possibly extinct species: those species of plants no longer known to exist after repeated search of the type localities and other known or likely places. Some species may be extinct in the wild but preserved by cultivation in gardens--such as the "Lost Franklinia." The above definitions define the status categories, but this report is initially concerned with rarity. A rare species of plant is one that has a small population in its range. It may be found in a restricted geographic re- gion, or it may occur sparsely over a wider area. When a rare species, sub- 17 species, or variety of plant appears on a list categorized as endangered, threatened, or possibly extinct, it becomes particularly subject to two criti- cal questions: 1. Is the plant species or subspecies a valid taxon? Perhaps it is (a) a synonym or nonvalid segregate of a more common or widespread species or (b) a rarely produced hybrid, polyploid, aberrant, sport, or unusual phenotype owing to some unusual condition or stress. 2. Is the species truly extinct? Perhaps it really occurs in small numbers or is more common or widespread but has not been observed or collected because (a) it is small, inconspicuous, or occurs in hidden habitats, (b) it blooms rarely, briefly, or at unusual times, germinates infrequently or has long dor- mant periods, or (c) it occurs only in difficult or inaccessible terrain or habitats rarely visited by collectors. These are questions that must be answered in order to develop accurate and valid lists. Some are difficult to answer; others may never be answered. At any rate, changes in status are expected with new information. development of Lists The lists were prepared by reviewing the best available published floras of regions, states, and localities of the United States. Species with very limited distributions or a rare status were listed and all available data com- piled. These and additional species were reviewed in the latest available taxonomic monographs and revisions, collections were checked in herbaria, and taxonomic specialists were consulted. Synonymy and changes in taxonomic status were determined. The lists then were compared with available state lists of rare and endangered plants. For species endemic to a single state, the rarity status given in the state lists proved to be valuable; however, for the more IS wide ranging species, the local designations of abundance in the state often had only limited value for the national lists. Special data cards used in preparing the lists permitted compilation of all available information on taxonomy, habitat, former and present distribu- tion (in detail, including counties), present rarity and status, endangerment , and threats, with the authorities and references cited. The data from the species cards were entered into a computer and printed out in lists according to family, species, state, and rarity and endangerment status. These lists included only the vascular plants: angiosperms (flowering plants), gymnosperms (pines and relatives), and pteridophytes (ferns). The lower plant groups --algae, fungi, lichens, mosses and liverworts --were not in- cluded at this time. Only species that are indigenous to the United States (including Alaska and Hawaii) are included. If a rare species occurs outside of the United States as well, it is not included unless the exact status of its rarity, en- dangerment, and distribution outside of the United States is known. Most spe- cies with ranges outside of the country have been excluded since data on their ranges and status generally are not available. No introduced, adventive, na- turalized, or domesticated species are included. Species and well recognized subspecies and varieties are included, but the forms, races, apomicts, and hybrids are not. In some genera, such as Crataegus (hawthorns) and Rubus (blackberries) , hybridization between species has produced a plethora of forms that have been given various taxonomic ranks and frequently have been designated as species by some botanists. Because of taxonomic disagreement in such genera, doubtful species are not dealt with in the present list. A species extinct in one state may be very common in another, and there- fore it would have no place in this national list. A species also may be rare 19 at the edge of its range but itself not endangered. The distribution and abundance of the flowering plants of the United States are fairly well known, but there are many gaps in knowledge, unknown geographic areas, and some undescribed taxa. In comparison with the flora of the British Isles, the United States flora has been studied less intensively, but compared with the flora of South America, it is well known. The northeastern United States (Gray's Manual of Botany range) is quite well known. The southwestern flora needs much work, and there are no recent accurate state floras for any of the states from Florida through Louisiana. Fortunately, Texas, California, and the Pacific Northwest recently have been studied, and the flora of the inter- mountain basin states of the west is being published. Although several floras of Alaska have been published, much exploration is needed. The highly endemic Hawaiian flora is fairly well documented. In addition to the floras, monographic revisions have been issued for va- rious families, genera, and other taxonomic groups. These are of major impor- tance in compiling lists of endangered, threatened, and recently extinct species, particularly for determining the correct scientific name and status of species, subspecies, and varieties. The monographs often contain distribution maps of the species treated. About 30 states of the United States have developed lists of rare and en- dangered plants, some of which are excellent and scientifically accurate. Others are merely lists of wildflowers that should not be collected but are not actually rare or endangered. Most of the states have different systems of classification for the various categories as well as methods for determining the status of rarity and endangerment . Some states have active committees (often volunteer) working on endangered and threatened plants. Some have compiled lists, have assigned categories, and 20 have actively revised and published the lists on a regular basis. Other states have concerned individuals or informal groups that compile lists. These groups or individuals may function as a part of state agencies, universities, or. pri- vate organizations. Many of the states have meetings or work groups that or- ganize and coordinate efforts within the state. Nearly all states have bota- nists occupied with compiling or revising a state flora and in checking on the status of species within the state. All available reports of rare and endan- gered plants from the various states have been utilized in preparing these national lists. Value of Lists These lists will provide scientific information necessary to help preserve those species of plants that are endangered or threatened. They specify which species should not be exploited commercially, or collected, or picked by indi- viduals. They should provide guidelines to federal and state agencies and to interested conservation groups. The lists should be of value to land use planners and to all agencies in- volved in preparing environmental impact statements in conformance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. An awareness of the endangered and threatened species of plants should be urged upon all people involved in the exploitation, development, management, and preservation of the land. A major value of the lists should be to assist in the selection of areas for preservation and in the designation of natural areas to be protected. With- out the benefit of such lists in past years, these decisions often have been based more on endangered animal species, interesting or scenic geological areas, or the preservation of unique habitats and forest types. The lists should prove to be of much greater value when the geographic distribution of each 21 species has been plotted accurately on maps. The lists should also stimulate detailed reviewing and checking of the status of the species and should result in revised and more accurate lists next year. More extensive field study of the listed species undoubtedly will result in the discovery of more populations, with the resultant removal of some species from the endangered, threatened, and recently extinct categories. Future Plans During 1974 it has been possible to compile lists for the United States, including Alaska, the Aleutian Islands, and the Hawaiian Islands. These lists include flowering plants, pines, ferns, and their relatives. For next year, plans are underway to update and improve the lists and to map the species distributions. The geographic areas covered will be extended to include the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. Lower plants, including algae, fungi, lichens, mosses, and liverworts, will be studied in the future. Mapping of the distribution of the endangered and threatened species will provide information as to which species already occur in protected areas such as parks, preserves, and natural areas, which species are most threatened, and which need to be given protection. Mapping also will permit the designation of centers of endemism and aggregation of species to assist in preserving areas for their protection. Causes of Rarity and Endangerment The distribution and the abundance or rarity of plant species result from a large number of factors, not only naturally caused but often man-caused. Species have developed, spread, retreated, and some have become extinct through- out millions of years of geological history. Development and extinction of 22 species is usually a long, slow process. Man, however, has sped up the process in the twentieth century because he has greatly modified the surface of the earth with his highly advanced technology. In the past (and certainly at pre- sent) he has shown an almost total lack of concern for the plant and animal species that share the planet with him. As a result, many species of plants recently have become extinct, and a large number are highly endangered unless they are provided quickly with special protection or the removal of threats. The long, slow geological and climatic changes that have taken place on earth have resulted in the development of new species, the extinction of spe- cies, and changes in their distribution and abundance. Some of the major na- tural factors that affect plants are uplift or sinking of land, development of mountain ranges, volcanic eruptions, flooding, development of islands, erosion, glaciation, xerothermic periods, droughts, expansion of deserts, eutrophication (filling of lakes and ponds), and fire. Natural biotic factors also affect the distribution and abundance of plants, Among the most important are newly evolved competitive species (with increased vigor), plant diseases, animal damage from overgrazing, insect damage, and the destruction of seeds and fruit. When species become very old or senescent, such as small populations of relicts from floras of older geological periods, they may suffer genetic depletion or loss of genetic variability and become inbred and unadaptive or develop narrow specialization that results in their rarity and perhaps extinction. Natural factors act over long periods of time with the result that the development and loss of species probably has been fairly well balanced. Stress factors, mentioned above, not only result in extinction, but also they can re- sult in the development of new species. Man has changed drastically the surface of the earth as a result of his 23 46-265 O - 75 - 3 enormously increased population and his technological advances. The building of more dams and power plants, strip mining, shale oil recovery, increased irri- gation and agriculture, development of cities, roads, factories, with the. re- sulting dumps and pollution, are further threatening to destroy or modify more of his natural environment. Plant populations often are reduced severely by the activities of man, par- ticularly in the destruction of habitats as well as in the destruction of plants and plant parts themselves. Plant habitats are destroyed outright by bulldozing, subsurface mining, strip mining, flooding, irrigation, agriculture, overgrazing, fires, and the lowering of water tables by wells and drainage. Plant populations are destroyed directly by man as the result of commercial or private exploitation, with the collection of entire plants, their seeds, fruits, or flowers. Despite the high frequency of unsuccessful transplants from the wild to cultivated gardens, collectors of rarities persist in causing serious damage to critical species. Timber removal, particularly clear cutting, with the resultant erosion, is a major and direct method of destruction. Man has accidentally or purposefully introduced over 1800 species of foreign vascular plants that are adventives or escapes, some of which have become na- turalized or have been cultivated in the continental United States. Nearly 2000 species have been introduced into Hawaii in this manner. Many of these species are aggressive weed pests that choke agricultural crop fields, damage lawns and pastures, and overgrow lakes and waterways. These introduced species, when free of their native diseases and pests that formerly held them in biolo- gical balance, often win out in competition with the native species. By taking over the habitats of rarer native species, they contribute to the increased rarity of many of these endangered or threatened plants. Plant species and populations are destroyed indirectly or changed as a re- 24 suit of various other activities set in motion by man: overgrazing by goats, cattle, sheep, and pigs; inadvertent or purposeful introduction of noxious weeds or other highly competitive species; introduction of plant diseases, insects, and other animal pests; use of chemicals, fertilizers, herbicides, and other biocides, which include air, water, and soil pollutants; and the destruction of pollinators such as insects, birds, and bats. The local introduction of di- seases, insects, birds, or other organisms may result in a spread over the en- tire continent, with serious unknown effects until after the damage is done. Preservation Preservation of rare species of plants requires the preservation and pro- tection of the habitats upon which they depend for growth and reproduction. In situ perpetuation of sufficient populations of endangered and threatened plants is required to ensure their survival. Three key elements are involved in this in situ perpetuation: (1) preven- tion of the destruction of populations and their habitats; (2) maintenance or enhancement of the population levels and viability; and (3) prevention of col- lection and commercial exploitation. Cultivation or artificial propagation, even in the best botanical gardens, is not an acceptable alternative to in situ perpetuation of species. Preserva- tion of a species' future cannot be assured in this way. Artificial propagation is a last resort and is done always with the ultimate objective of reestablishing the species in its natural habitat. Prevention of the Destruction of Plant Habitats It is essential that habitat preservation be recognized as the critical factor in all conservation activities and in legislative and executive acts, amendments, orders, and regulations. 25 Since preservation and protection of endangered and threatened plants de- pends primarily on the preservation of their habitats--with about 2000 endan- gered and threatened species--it is not practical to attempt to preserve indi- vidual species. A more practical method for preservation involves the mapping of all the species ranges to determine the aggregations or centers of endangered species. Many are known to occur together in unique habitats such as isolated mountain tops, former or present lake or river shores, and protected areas in valleys and canyons. Specialized habitats such as serpentine barrens, cedar glades, disjunct bogs, sand dunes, and other sites also may harbor endangered species. A bank of the Apalachicola River in northwest Florida, for example, has a con- centration of 14 endemic rare and endangered species found only in that loca- tion. Rare and endangered species are usually narrow endemics, i.e., they occur only in restricted ranges. In the United States there are several major centers of endemism or areas with concentrations of endemic species known only from spe- cific regions: Florida, the southern Appalachian Mountains, Texas, and Califor- nia. There is also considerable endemism in the southwestern region comprising Nevada, Arizona, and Utah, and in the Pacific Northwest of Oregon and Washington. Endemism occurs to a limited degree in the northeastern states, with some in the Ohio River Valley, but it is very limited in the glaciated area of the Great Lakes region, and it is lowest in the extensive Great Plains region. Knowledge about endemic centers and aggregations of species is of considerable value in determining and establishing priorities for preserving land to protect these plants. A variety of methods can and should be used for protecting and preserving habitats and populations, including landmark designations, conservation easements, 26 acquisition, and penalty procedures. These methods should be fully explored and the findings made available for use in appropriate cases through executive and legislative action. Much protective activity can be accomplished in the existing preservation programs: (1) the National Park Service should incorporate the list of threatened and endangered species as criteria in its Natural Landmark Program (by being in- cluded in the regional natural landmark surveys, endangered and threatened spe- cies populations could be made eligible for designation as Natural Landmarks); (2) the Federal Committee on Ecological Reserves should encourage natural area programs in the states to do the same. Endangered and threatened plants should be recognized as basic elements in land use plans and inventories when the Federal government is involved either in a direct capacity or in the role of a guiding or advisory party: (1) Federal agencies involved in land management, including the Bureau of Land Management, Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service, Forest Service, Atomic Energy Commission, and Department of Defense, should recognize threatened and endan- gered species as natural resources and include their populations and supporting habitats as elements in these agencies' natural resource surveys or inventories, as seen in the recent Forest Service Multi-Resource Inventory Act (Humphrey- Rarick Bill); (2) state and local land planning agencies and bodies should be encouraged to include threatened and endangered species in the agencies' plan- ning, with particular attention to the plants' critical supporting habitats; for example, the Office of Land Use and Water Planning should include these species in its guidelines to the states and should also incorporate the lists as elements in any national land use planning legislation. Monitoring and Research Protection of plant habitats may be insufficient for the preservation of 27 some populations of threatened and endangered species. Consequently, it is es- sential that monitoring of populations be undertaken to determine trends in their levels and viability, that research essential to development of manage- ment programs (based on this research) be planned and carried out to maintain or increase population levels and viability. In developing the plans for preservation and protection of rare species, it will be necessary to understand the reasons for the rarity of each species and the specific causes of endangerment . Rare species may be local endemic species occurring in small geographical areas or in highly specialized habitats, They may be limited to refugia, or protected places, where, owing to special factors, they can persist. The habitats of rare plants often are unstable or geologically young areas with unique characteristics that prevent the growth of highly competitive, ag- gressive species: sandy pine barrens, talus slopes, cedar barrens, shale bar- rens, serpentine barrens, acid bogs, mountain tops, rock cliffs, ravines, sandy shores, islands, peninsulas, river banks, and hot, alkaline, or salt springs. Many species occur in the pioneer or early stages of ecological succession in a given region. It is an interesting fact that many species of rare plants of diverse geographic affinity often are found congregated in these habitats. The rare species growing on specialized substrates, such as serpentine, are not restricted to the substrate but are preserved from extinction caused by compe- tition with other plant species when the latter are unable to grow on serpen- tine. Endemic species are those with restricted or limited geographic distribu- tion. These may be relict species that are ancient, that show little variabi- lity, that are highly restricted to specific habitats, and that may be on their way to extinction; for example, the Giant Sequoia (Sequoiadendron gigantewri) , 28 the Florida Torreya {Torreya taxifolia) , the Florida Yew (Taxus floridana) , the Lost Franklinia (Franklinia alatamaha) , and the Georgia Plume {Elliottia raoemosa) with its low fertility, poor germination, and difficult regeneration from cuttings. Relict rare species that occur in small populations can lose their store of genetic variability and become depauperized. Extinction thus can result from a narrow specialization to a restricted habitat. Many rare species, however, that once were highly restricted in range grow well when in- troduced into other areas. The Lost Franklinia was known only from a habitat of about two acres in Georgia; now it grows well in cultivation in Great Britain, Washington, D. C., New Jersey, and other areas. Other rare species are newly evolved and have not yet had time to occur in a wider range. These often are aggressive and capable of withstanding vari- ous threats. If the biology of the rare species, therefore, is understood, effective action can be taken to help preserve them. Prevention of Commercial Exploitation According to Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the Sec- retary of Interior should publish these lists of endangered and threatened plant species in the Federal Register simultaneously with, or immediately after, the presentation of the "Smithsonian Report" to Congress, Further, a legal search should be made to ascertain the most rapid means to implement the Act's ban on commercial exploitation. Speed in application of the Act's clauses on collection, transport, and sale of endangered and threatened plants should have the status of top priori- ty following publication of these lists. The longer the period between the report's appearance and legal application of the Act, the greater becomes the danger of last-minute and extensive predation on commercially exploitable species. 29 The sections of the Act relating to collection, transport, and sale of endangered and threatened animals should be applied equally to endangered and threatened plants, particularly the section on the ban of commercial trade in endangered species. Since a relatively small number of the endangered plant species are used in commercial trade, effort should be concentrated on monitoring those species in enforcing the Act. This subset of species likely to appear in commercial trade is identified in a separate list of commercially exploited species. A potential danger involved in public listing of endangered species is the possible pressure that might be put on the remaining endangered or threatened plants by well-meaning but misguided persons who think that they should dig up the last specimens from their native environment to "grow" them in their own gardens—usually with fatal results. This problem must be clearly stated, and appropriate warnings should be issued. 50 LIST OF COMMERCIALLY EXPLOITED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES This list of commercially exploited species is incomplete; comparison of plant catalogs with the endangered and threatened lists would result in z much longer list. Commercial plant catalogs usually quote the highest prices for the en- dangered and threatened species, with accompanying comments on their rarity and desirability. Most of these plants are collected from the wild. The dealers specialize in selling rare cacti and other succulents such as Dud- leya and Sedum, lilies of many types, iris, some orchids, and many flowers such as primula, columbine, and mallows. Various palms, cycads, and flower- ing shrubs, including Rhododendron and Amoreuxia, are advertised. There is a very large trade in the sale of exotic-looking carnivorous plants, such as the Venus Fly Trap, and pitcher plants, including Darlingtonia. Commercial dealers in some cases will collect these species by the truckload from the wild and sell them immediately or shortly after having transplanted the plants into gardens. Cacti suffer the greatest threat; many commercial dealers have a large trade in potted cactus plants. Since commercial dealers usually know the rarity status of the plants that they are collecting from the wild, dealers can be controlled more ef- fectively than the gardening public, who collect whatever is attractive and unusual. It is important to make readily available to the public illustra- tions of endangered but exploited species, as done in Europe, particularly for rare and endangered alpine plants. 31 Efforts should be made to end the fad for rarity by discouraging deal- ers from advertising the rarity of their offerings. Instead, advertising emphasis should be directed to conservation of species grown from seed and not collected from the wild. Dealers and the public should be encouraged to leave endangered flowers undistrubed or only to photograph them care- fully in situ. Many species cannot be transplanted; if any roots are broken or dam- aged, the plants will die from fungus or disease. This is especially true for certain rare orchids. Since the growing habits of many species of rare and endangered plants are specialized to the frequently unusual habitats in which they occur, these species are particularly difficult to grow or to have reproduce in cultivation. An informed public could decrease significantly the commerical and pri- vate pressure under which these exploited species survive. Species Status Exploi- tation status* Locality Arecaceae Rhapidophyllum hystrix Cactaceae Ancistrocactus tobuschii Cereus eriophorus var. fragrans Cereus gracilis var. aboriginum Cereus gracilis var. simpsonii Cereus robinii var. deeringii Cereus robinii var. robinii Coryphantha dasyacantha var. varicolor Coryphantha duncanii Coryphantha hesteri Coryphantha minima Coryphantha ramillosa Coryphantha recurvata Coryphantha scheeri var. robustispina Coryphantha sneedii var. leei Coryphantha sneedii var. sneedii Coryphantha strobiliformis var durispina Coryphantha vivipara var. alversonii Threatened Expl Alabama Florida Georgia Mississippi Endangered Priv Texas Endangered Priv Florida Endangered Priv Florida Endangered Priv Florida Endangered Priv Florida Endangered Priv Florida Threatened Priv Texas Threatened Priv Texas Threatened Priv Texas Endangered Priv Texas Endangered Expl Texas Threatened Expl Arizona Threatened Priv Arizona Threatened Priv New Mexico Threatened Priv Texas New Mexico Endangered Expl Texas Threatened Expl Arizona California vExpl = commercially exploited; Priv = privately collected. 33 Species Status Exploi- tation status* Locality Coryphantha vivipara var. rosea Threatened Priv Arizona Nevada California Echinocactus horizonthalonius var. nicholii Endangered Expl Arizona Echinocereus chloranthus var. neocapillus Endangered Expl Texas Echinocereus ledingii Threatened Priv Arizona Echinocereus lloydii Endangered Priv Texas New Mexico Echinocereus reichenbachii var. albertii Endangered Priv Texas Echinocereus reichenbachii var. chisosensis Threatened Priv Texas Echinocereus reichenbachii var. fitchii Threatened • Priv Texas Echinocereus triglochidiatus var. arizonicus Endangered Priv Arizona Echinocereus viridiflorus var. correllii Threatened Expl Texas Echinocereus viridiflorus var. davisii Endangered Expl Texas Epithelantha bokei Threatened Expl Texas Ferocactus viridescens Endangered Priv California Ferocactus acanthodes var. eastwoodii Threatened Expl Arizona Mammillaria orestera Threatened Expl Arizona Mammillaria thornberi Threatened Expl Arizona Neolloydia erectocentra var. acunensis Threatened Priv Arizona Neolloydia erectocentra var. erectocentra Threatened 34 Priv Arizona Species Status Exploi- tation status11 Locality Neolloydia mariposensis Neolloydia warnockii Pediocactus bradyi Pediocactus knowltonii Pediocactus paradinei Pediocactus peeblesianus var. fickeiseniae Pediocactus peeblesianus var. peeblesianus Pediocactus sileri Sclerocactus glaucus Sclerocactus mesae-verdae Sclerocactus spinosior Sclerocactus wrightiae Thelocactus bicolor var. flavidispinus Cochlospermaceae Amoreuxia wrightii Crassulaceae Dudleya spp. Echeveria collomae Echeveria rusbyi Parvisedum leiocarpum Endangered Priv Texas Threatened Priv Texas Endangered Expl Arizona Endangered Expl New Mexico Threatened Expl Arizona Threatened Expl Arizona Endangered Expl Arizona Endangered Priv Arizona Utah Endangered Expl Utah Colorado Threatened Expl Colorado New Mexico Threatened Expl Utah Arizona Threatened Priv Utah Threatened Priv Texas Threatened Expl Texas Endangered Threatened Priv California Endangered Priv Arizona Endangered Priv Arizona Endangered Priv California 35 Species Status Exploi- tation status* Locality Sedum spp. Cycadaceae Zamia integrifolia Droseraceae Dionaea muscipula Ericaceae Rhododendron vaseyi Iridaceae Iris tenuis Liliaceae Agave utahensis var. nevadensis Calochortus spp. Erythronium oregonum Fritillaria spp. Lilium wash in gt on i an urn var. minus Zephyranthes simpsonii Zephyranthes treatiae Onagraceae Clarkia spp. Orchidaceae Encyclia boothiana var. erythronioides Endangered Threatened Threatened Expl Priv Endangered Priv Expl Priv Threatened Priv Endangered Priv Endangered Priv Threatened Threatened Priv 36 United States Florid? North Carolina South Carolina North Carolina Oregon Threatened Expl California Nevada Endangered Priv California Threatened Threatened Priv Oregon Washington Endangered Priv California Threatened Oregon Endangered Priv California Threatened Priv Florida Threatened Priv Florida California Florida Species Status Exploi- tation status^ Locality Ranunculaceae Aquilegia jonesii Polygonaceae Eriogonum thymoides Polypodiaceae Polysticum kruckebergii Portulacaceae Lewisia tweedyi Primulaceae Primula nevadensis Sarraceniaceae Darlingtonia californica Sarracenia oreophila Sarracenia psittacina Sarracenia rubra Threatened Threatened Threatened Endangered Expl Priv Expl Priv Expl Priv Montana Washington Oregon Idaho Washington Washington Endangered Priv Nevada Threatened Expl Priv Oregon California Endangered Priv Alabama Georgia Tennessee Threatened Priv Georgia Florida Alabama Mississippi Louisiana Threatened Priv Georgia Florida Alabama Mississippi North Carolina South Carolina 37 LIST OF RECENTLY EXTINCT AND POSSIBLY EXTINCT SPECIES OF HIGHER PLANTS IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES "Extinct" is a term that probably is too strong and definitive to use for plant species that, on available evidence, have "disappeared" during the last three hundred years. Knowledge of the flora usually is not sufficient to state with complete certitude that a species is recently extinct. Accord- ingly, most of these plant species have been labeled "probably or possibly extinct," or "extinct in the wild but cultivated." For plants that occurred during past geological periods and that are known only from fossils, it is safe to use the term "extinct." Even some spe- cies known only from fossils, however, have been discovered later to be livinj in an isolated refugium. Except for fossils, therefore, the designation "re- cently extinct" means merely that, after a species was described and known, it disappeared and could not be rediscovered even with repeated searches over a number of years in the type locality and similar or likely places. There is always the possibility that species categorized as "recently extinct" will be rediscovered, especially those occurring in difficult terrains seldom vis- ited by collectors. Names of the species included in the "recently extinct" or "possibly ex- tinct" lists have been gathered from the literature, herbaria, and various specialists. Considering the very large area of knowledge involved, however, and the numerous botanists and other specialists who may have in hand unpub- lished data on various species, it has not been possible to contact all pos- sible sources of information. Publication of this initial list should stimu- late such persons to publish or otherwise make available their own valuable 38 data. In addition, the list should stimulate intensified field studies and research to rediscover or validate the extinction, rarity, abundance, and threat status of some species and the taxonomic validity of other, lesser known species. Species, subspecies, or varieties extirpated or "extinct" in one state but found elsewhere are not included in this list. Species extinct in the wild but living in cultivation are included with appropriate notation. The original listing was fairly extensive, but many species have been deleted as new and unpublished data became available; e.g., Petalo sternum reverchonii in Texas was considered to be extinct since 1880, but recently it has been re- discovered. As the list is being updated, it is hoped that deletions will continue to be made. At present there are 100 kinds of plants listed, which means that 0.5 percent of the plant species of the United States probably are now extinct--an irretrievable loss. 39 46-265 O - 75 - 4 Species and Varieties Locality Date Last Collected Status' Aizoaceae Sesuvium trianthemoides Apiaceae Lomatium greenmanii Apocynaceae Apocynum jonesii Asclepiadaceae Matelea radiata Asteraceae Calycadenia fremontii Cirsium hydrophyl lum var. hydrophyl lum Erigeron perglaber Lriophyllum nubigenum var. nubigenum Greenella discoidea Haplopappus contractus Helianthus nuttallii var. parishii Helianthus praetermissus Helianthus smithii Hymenoxys texana Perityle rotundata Kenedy Co. , Tex. 1947 Wallowa Mts. , Ore. 1900 Flagstaff, Ariz, Brooks Co. , Tex. 1909 Chico, Butte Co., and 1937 Tehama Co. , Calif. Park, Mariposa Co. , Calif. PrEx PoEx, Tax? PoEx PrEx PoEx Solano and Marin Cos., 1959 PoEx Calif. Arizona 1869 PoEx Yosemite National 1938 PoEx Cochise Co. , Ariz . 1880s PoEx Ft. Bridger, Uinta 1873 PoEx Co . , Wyo . Orange and San 1920 PoEx Bernadino Cos. , Calif. New Mexico 1929 Ex Smith, Randolph Co., 1884 PoEx Ala. ; Rabun Co. , Ga. Houston, Harris Co., 1900 PrEx Tex. Presidio Co., (Pecos 1852 PrEx Co.?), Tex. 40 Species and Varieties Locality Date Last Collected Status* Asteraceae (continued) Solidago porteri Betulaceae Betula uber Boraginaceae Cryptantha aperta Cryptantha insolita Mertensia toiyabensis Brassicaceae Arabis fructicosa Lesquerella lata Lesquerella macrocarpa Physaria grahamii Smelowskia holmgrenii Thelypodium tenue Bromeliaceae Hechtia texensis Burmanniaceae Thismia americana Cactaceae Coryphantha scheeri var. uncinata Echinocereus blankii var. angusticeps Monticello, Ga. , 1846 Jackson Co. , N.C. Smyth Co. , Va. 1914 Brewster Co. , Tex. Chicago, 111. El Paso Co. , Tex. Hidalgo Co. , Tex. 41 1885 1913 1900 1934 PoEx, Tax? PrEx Mesa Co. , Colo. 1892 PrEx Clark Co. , Nev. 1905 PrEx Nye Co. , Nev. 1882 PoEx Undine Falls, 1899 PrEx Yellowstone National Park, Wyo. Lincoln Co. , N. Mex. 1903 PoEx Sweetwater Co., Wyo. 1900 PrEx Uintah Basin, eastern 1930 PoEx, Tax' Utah Nye Co. , Nev. 1945 PoEx Presidio Co. , Tex. 1942 PoEx PoEx Ex PoEx PrEx Species and Varieties Locality Date Last Collected Status* Cactaceae (continued) Echinocereus hempelii Opuntia strigil var. flexospina Campanulaceae Campanula robinsiae Githopsis filicaulis Githopsis latifolia Caryophyllaceae Arenaria livermorensis Ceratophyllaceae Ceratophyllum floridanum Chenopodiaceae Atriplex tularensis Cistaceae Lechea mensalis Crassulaceae Dudleya traskiae Cuscutaceae Cuscuta warneri Fabaceae Astragalus columbianus Lincoln Co., N. Mex. 1897 PrEx, Tax' Webb Co., Tex. 1911 PoEx Brooksville, Fla. 1958 Mission Canyon, San 1884 Diego, Calif. Big Meadows, Plumas 1912 Co. , Calif. Livermore, Davis Mts., 1934 Tex. v Big Pine Key, Monroe 1953 Co., Fla. Santa Barbara Islands, 1968 Calif. Millard Co. , Utah Priests Rapids, Yakima Co. , Wash. 1957 1883 PoEx, Tax: PoEx PoEx PrEx PoEx Bakersfield, Kern 1921 PoEx Co. , Calif. Chisos Mts. , 1931 PrEx Brewster Co. , Tex. PoEx, Cult PoEx PrEx 42 Species and Varieties Locality Date Last Collected Status" Fabaceae (continued) Astragalus desereticus Astragalus humillimus Astragalus lentiginosus var. chartaceus Astragalus lentiginosus var. sesquimetralis San Pete Co. , Utah 1909 PrEx Montezuma Co. , Colo. 1875 PoEx San Pete Co. , Utah 1894 PoEx, Tax Soda Springs, Nev. Astragalus robbinsii var. robbinsii Psoralea macrophylla Psoralea stipulata Hydrocharitaceae Elodea brandegeae Elodea linearis Elodea nevadensis Elodea schweinitzii Hydrophyllaceae Phacelia cinerea Phacelia lenta Chittenden Co., Vt, Polk Co., N.C. Clark and Floyd Cos Ind. Truckee, Sierra Nevada, Calif. 1882 1893 1897 1856 1904 Priests Rapids to Wallula, Walla Walla Co., Wash, 1883 PoEx Astragalus linifolius Mesa Co. , Colo. 1926 PoEx Astragalus perianus Sevier Co. , Utah 1905 PoEx Astragalus pycnostachyus var. lanosissimus Ventura and Los Angeles Cos. , Calif. 1882 PrEx Ex Ex Ex, Culti- vated to 1871 Ex, Tax? Nashville, Tenn. 1875 Ex, Tax? Nevada 1887 Ex, Tax? Northampton Co., Pa.; 1832 Ex, Tax? New Jersey San Nicolas Is. , 1901 PoEx Calif. PoEx 43 Species and Varieties Locality Date Last Collected Scatus' Juncaceae Juncus pervetus Lamiaceae Hedeoma pilosum Monardella leucocephalc Scutellaria ocmulgee Liliaceae Calochortus monanthus Schoenolirion texanum Linaceae Linum macrocarpum Malvaceae Malacothamnus abbottii Malacothamnus mendocinensis Nyctaginaceae Pisonia floridana Orchidaceae Spiranthes parksii Orobanchaceae Orobanche valida Poaceae Calamagrostis nubila Barnstable Co., Mass 1928 Brewster Co. , Tex, 1940 Merced and Stanislaus 1941 Cos., Calif. Macon, Ga. 1898 Austin, Tex. Mobile, Ala. 1936 1897 Salinas River, 1899 Monterey Co., Calif. Ukiah, Mendocino 1939 Co. , Calif. Rock Key (near Key West), Fla. Brazos Co. , Tex. 1870 1945 Ex, Cult PrEx PoEx PrEx Yreka, Siskiyou Co., 1876 PoEx Calif. PrEx PoEx PoEx PoEx PrEx, Tax? PoEx San Gabriel Mts., Los 1929 PrEx Angeles Co., Calif. Mt. Washington, N.H. 1862 Ex, Tax' 44 Species and Varieties Locality Date Last Collected Status1 Poaceae (continued) Dissanthelium californicum Festuca dasyclada Panicum shastense Pleuropogon oregonus Trisetum orthochaetum Polygonaceae Chorizanthe valida Eriogonum ericifolium var. ericifolium Eriogonum lemmonii Polygonum montereyense Potamogetonaceae Potamogeton floridanus Rosaceae Potentilla multijuga Ranunculaceae Ranunculus acriformis var. aestivalis Saxifragaceae Lithophragma maximum Santa Catalina and 1912 San Clemente islands, Calif. Joe's Valley, 1875 Colorado R. , Utah Castle Crag, Shasta 1912 Co., Calif. Union and Lake Cos., 1901 Oreg. Missoula Co., Mont. 1908 Florida 1886 Ballona, Los Angeles 1849 Co., Calif. Sevier R. . Utah 1960 San Clemente Is. , 1936 Calif. PrEx PoEx PrEx PoEx PrEx Marin Co. , Calif. 1962 PoEx Yavapai Co. , Ariz. 1887 PoEx Washoe Co. , Nev. 1875 Ex Monterey Co., Calif. 1917 Ex, Tax PoEx PrEx PrEx PoEx 45 Species and Varieties Locality Date Last Collected Status* Scrophulariaceae Agalinis (Gerardia) stenophylla Tampa, Hillsboro Co., Fla. 1897 PoEx Bacopa simulans Charles City Co. , Va. 1941 PrEx Castilleja leschkeana Point Reyes, Marin Co. , Calif. 1960 PoEx Castilleja ludoviciana Jeff Davis Parish, La. 1915 PoEx Cordylanthus mollis ssp. mollis San Francisco Bay, Napa Co., Calif. 1966 PoEx Cordylanthus palmatus Colusa, Fresno, Madera, Merced, and Yolo Cos., Calif. 1970 PoEx, Cult Reintro to wild Mimulus brandegei Santa Cruz Is., Calif. 1932 PrEx Mimulus traskiae Santa Catalina Is. , Calif. 1904 Ex Orthocarpus pachystachyus Pedicularis furbishiae Seymeria havardii Solanaceae Lycium hassei Lycium verrucosum Sterculiaceae Nephropetalum pringlei Shasta R. , Siskiyou 1913 Co., Calif. Aroostook Co., Maine 1943 Maverick Co., Tex. 1882 Santa Catalina and 1936 San Clemente islands, Santa Barbara, and San Diego Co. , Calif. San Nicolas Is., 1901 Ventura Co. , Calif. Hidalgo Co. , Tex. 1888 PoEx PrEx PrEx PoEx PoEx PoEx 46 Species and Varieties Locality Date Last Collected Status' Theaceae Franklinia alatamaha Valerianaceae Valerianella texana Mcintosh Co. , Ga. 1803 Ex, Cult Gillespie Co., Tex. 1936 PoEx *Ex = Recently extinct or extinct in wild: not collected during extensive search over a number of years; type locality or sites may be destroyed. PrEx = Probably extinct: not recollected after one or a few visits to the type locality and/or similar sites. PoEx = Possibly extinct: not recollected or known only from type locality for a number of years; may not have been searched for. Tax? = Taxonomic status in doubt, perhaps owing to scarcity of material; possible hybrid. Cult = May be extinct in nature, but the plants are in cultivation or have been transplanted. J7 LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES Endangered species of plants are in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of their range. These plants usually are rare, with limited geographical distribution, and often occur in fragile, threatened habitats. Endangered species are more immediately in danger than threatened species and may become extinct unless they are provided with protection or removal of threats to their existence. Some endangered species have little reproductive capability and are so narrowly endemic or specialized to a certain habitat or specific condition that they are unable to withstand any threats or dangers that normally would not threaten most plants. At the present time, 761 kinds or 3.8 percent of the native higher plants are considered to be endangered in the continental United States. Also included in the endangered plant list are 100 kinds of plants con- sidered as "recently extinct," "probably extinct," or "possibly extinct." These are included in the list in order to provide them with protection if they are rediscovered as the result of more intensive searches. If they are redis- covered, they will be included automatically in the endangered category unless another status is determined. As the flora is studied better, many species certainly will be removed from the endangered list and placed on the threatened list or deleted as a re- sult of the discovery of more populations or wider distribution of a species. Also, some endangered species can be expected to become extinct. This list, 48 accordingly, should be considered as the list with the most complete and accurate information available at the present time. 49 FAMILY LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE ACANTHACEAE ACANTHACEAE ALISMATACEAE ANACARDIACEAE ANNONACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APIACEAE APOCYNACEAE APOCYNACEAE ARECACEAE ARISTOLOCHIACEAE ARISTOLOCHIACEAE ASCLEPIADACEAE ASCLEPIADACEAE ASCLEPIADACEAE ASCLEPIADACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE JUSTICIA COOLEYI JUSTICIA CRASSIFOLIA SAGITTARIA FASCICULATA RHUS KEARNEYI ASIMINA TETRAMERA CYMOPTERUS DUCHESNENSIS CYMOPTERUS MINIMUS CYhOPTERUS NIVALIS LOMATIUM BRADSHAWI I LOMATIUM MINUS LOMATIUM RAVENII LOMATIUM SUKSDORFII LOMATIUM TUBEROSUM NEOPARRYA LITHOPHlLA OXYPOLIS GREENMANII SANICULA MARITIMA SIUM FLORIDANUM TAUSCHIA HOOVER I AMSONIA KEARNEYANA CYCLADENIA JONESII ROYSTONEA ELATA HEXASTYLIS NANIFLORA HEXASTYLIS SPECIOSA ASCLEPIAS EASTWOODIANA CYCLODON ALABAMENSE MATELEA EDWARDSENSIS MATELEA TEXENSIS AMBROSIA CHEIRANTHIFOLIA ANTENNARIA ARCUATA ASTER CHASEI ASTER PINIFOLIUS BALDUINA ATROPURPUREA BLENNOSPERMA BAKERI BLENNOSPERMA NANUM VAR. ROBUSTUM BRICKELLIA VIEJENSIS CIRSIUM CLOKEYI CIRSIUM FONTINALE VAR. FONTINALE CIRSIUM LONCHOLEPIS CIRSIUM RHOTHOPHILUM ' COREOPSIS INTERMEDIA COREOPSIS TRIPTERIS VAR. SUBRHOMBOIDEA DYSSODIA TEPHROLEUCA FLORIDA FLORIDA NORTH CAROLINA ARIZONA FLORIDA UTAH UTAH NEVADA OREGON OREGON CALIFORNIA WASHINGTON, OREGON WASHINGTON COLORADO FLORIDA CALIFORNIA FLORIDA WASHINGTON ARIZONA UTAH FLORIDA NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH CAROLINA, VIRGINIA ALABAMA NEVADA ALABAMA TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS IDAHO ILLINOIS FLORIDA GEORGIA, FLORIDA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA TEXAS NEVADA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS 50 LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STAThS SPECIES STATE ECHINACEA TENNESSEENSI S ERIGERON BASALTICUS ERIGERON CALVUS ERIGERON DELICATUS ERIGERON ERIOPHYLLUS ERIGERON FLAGELLARIS VAR. TRILOBATUS ERIGERON FOLIOSUS VAR. BLOCHMANAE ERIGERON GEISER1 VAR. CALCICOLA ERIGtRON KACHINENSIS ERIGERON KUSCHE1 ERIGERON LATUS ERIGERON MAGUIREI ERIGERON RELIGIOSUS ERIGLRON RHIZOMATUS ERIGERON SIONIS ERIOPHYLLUM LANATUM VAR. HALLII ERIOPHYLLUM MOHAVENSE EUPATORIUM RESINOSUM VAR. KENTUCKIENSE GALINSOGA SEMICALVA VAR. PERCALVA GNAPHALIUM OBTUSIFOLIUM VAR. SAXICOLA GRINDELIA OOLEPIS HAPLOPAPPUS EASTWOOOAE HAPLOPAPPUS FREMONT I I SSP. MONOCEPHALUS HAPLOPAPPUS RADIATUS HAPLOPAPPUS SALIClNUS HELIANTHUS EGGERTII HELIANTHUS EXILIS HELIANTHUS LACINIATUS SSP. CRENATUS HELIANTHUS NIVEUS SSP. TEPHRODES HELIANTHUS PARADOXUS HEMIZONIA CONJUGENS HEMIZONIA FLORIBUNDA HEMIZONIA MINTHORNII HETEROTHECA RUTHII HOLOCARPHA MACRAOENIA JAMESIANTHUS ALABAMENSIS LASTHENIA BURKEI LAYIA DISCOIDEA LIATRIS OHLINGERAE LIATRIS PROVINCIALIS MACHAERANTHERA ARIZONICA MACHAERANTHERA AUREA MACHAERANTHERA LEUCANTHEMIFOL I A TENNESSEE WASHINGTON CALIFORNIA OREGONt CALIFORNIA ARIZONA UTAH CALIFORNIA TEXAS UTAH ARIZONA IDAHO UTAH UTAH, ARIZONA NEW MEXICO UTAH CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA KENTUCKY ARIZONA WISCONSIN TEXAS CALIFORNIA , » COLORADO OREGON, IDAHO ARIZONA KENTUCKY, TENNESSLE CALIFORNIA NEW MEXICO CALIFORNIA TEXAS. NEW MEXICO CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA TENNESSEE CALIFORNIA ALABAMA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA FLORIDA FLORIDA, ALABAMA ARIZONA TEXAS NEVADA 51 C«*Li¥iOMAL PARK NAT101 LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES FAMILY SPECIES STATE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAF ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAF ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAF ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAF ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAF ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAF ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAF ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAE ASTERACEAF BERBERIDACEAE BERBERIDACEAE BERBERIDACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE BORAGINACEAE MARSHALLIA MOHR I MICROSERIS LACINIATA SSP. SISKIYOUENSIS PECTIS RUSBYI PENTACHAETA LYONII PERITYLE BISETOSA VAR. BISETOSA PERITYLE BISETOSA VAR. SCALARIS PERITYLE CINEREA PERITYLE GILENSIS VAR. SALENSIS PERITYLE LINDHEIMERI VAR. HALIMIFOLIA PERITYLE PAHRYI PERITYLE V1TREOMONTANA PLUMKERA AMBIGENS PSEUDOBAHIA PEIRSONII SENECIO FRANCISCANUS SENECIO LAYNEAE SENECIO PORTERI SILPHIUM INTEGRIFOLIUM VAR. GATTINGERI SOLIDAGO ALBOPILOSA SOLIDAGO LINDHEIMERIANA SOLIDAGO SHORTII STFPHANOMERIA MALHEURENSIS STEPHANOMERIA SCHOTTII TANACETUM COMPACTUM TARAXACUM CARNEOCOLORATUM TOWNSENDIA APRICA TRACYINA ROSTRATA VIGUIERA LUDENS VIGUIERA SOLICEPS BERBERIS HARRISONIANA BERBER1S NEVINII BERBERIS SONNE I AMSINCKIA GRANDIFLORA CRYPTANTHA ATWOODII CRYPTANTHA BREVIFLORA CRYPTANTHA GRAHAMII CRYPTANTHA JOHNSTONII CRYPTANTHA JONESIANA CRYPTANTHA OCHROLEUCA CRYPTANTHA ROOSIORUM CRYPTANTHA SHACKLETTEANA CRYPTANTHA WEBERI DASYNOTUS DAUBENMIREI HACKELIA CRONOUISTII ALABAMA* GEORGIA CALIFORNIA ARIZONA CALIFORNIA TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS ARIZONA TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS ARIZONA CALIFORNIA ARIZONA CALIFORNIA COLORADO, OREGON TENNESSEE KENTUCKY TEXAS KENTUCKY, OHIO OREGON ARIZONA NEVADA ALASKA UTAH CALIFORNIA TEXAS UTAH ARIZONA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA ARIZONA UTAH UTAH UTAH UTAH UTAH CALIFORNIA ALASKA COLORADO IDAHO OREGON 52 LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE HACKELIA DAVISII HACKELIA OPHIOBIA HACKELIA VENUSTA PLA6I0B0THRYS DIFFUSUS PLAGIOBOTHRYS HIRTUS SSP. HIRTUS PLAGIOBOTHRYS LAMPROCARPUS ARABIS BREWERI VAR. PECUNIARIA ARABIS MCDONALDIANA ARABIS OXYLOBULA ARA6IS PERSTELLATA VAR. AMPLA ARABIS PERSTELLATA VAR. PERSTELLATA BRAYA HUMILIS SSP. VENTOSA CARDAMINE CONSTANCEI CARDAMINE PATTERSONII DRABA APRICA DRABA ARIDA DRABA ASPRELLA VAR. ASPRELLA DRABA ASPRELLA VAR. KAIBABENSIS DRABA INCISA DRABA PAUCIFRUCTA ERYSIMUM CAPITATUM VAR. ANGUSTATUM ERYSIMUM FRANCISCANUM VAR. FRANCISCANUM EUTREMA PENLANDII GLAUCOCARPUM SUFFRUTESCENS LEAVENWORTHIA ALABAMICA VAR. BRACHYSTYLA LEAVENWORTHIA AUREA LEAVENWORTHIA CRASSA VAR. CRASSA LEAVENWORTHIA CRASSA VAR. ELONGATA LEAVENWORTHIA EXIGUA VAR. LACINIATA LEAVENWORTHIA EXIGUA VAR. LUTEA LEPIDIUM BARNEBYANUM LEPIDIUM DAVISII LESOUERELLA AUREA LESOUERELLA DENSIPILA LESOUERELLA FILIFORMIS LESOUERELLA FREMONT 1 1 LESOUERELLA LYRATA LESOUERELLA PERFORATA LESOUERELLA PRUINOSA LESOUERELLA STONENSIS LESOUERELLA VALIDA SELENIA JONESII IDAHO OREGON WASHINGTON CALIFORNIA OREGON OREGON CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA COLORADO TENNESSEE KENTUCKY COLORADO IDAHO OREGON SOUTH CAROLINA, GtOKGlA, ARKANSASi MISSOURI NEVADA ARIZONA ARIZONA TENNESSEE NEVADA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA COLORADO UTAH ALABAMA OKLAHOMA, TEXAS ALABAMA ALABAMA KENTUCKY ALABAMA, TENNESSEE UTAH IDAHO NEW MEXICO TENNESSEE, ALABAMA MISSOURI WYOMING ALABAMA TENNESSEE COLORADO TENNESSEE TEXAS, NEW MEXICO TEXAS 53 FAMILY BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACCAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE BRASSICACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CACTACEAE CAMPANULACEAE LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE SISYMBRIUM KEARNEYI SMELOWSKIA BOREALIS VAR. VILLOSA SMELOWSKIA OVALIS SSP. CONGESTA STREPTANTHUS ALBIDUS SSP. ALBIDUS STREPTANTHUS CALLISTUS STREPTANTHUS FARNSWORTHI ANUS STREPTANTHUS GLANDULOSUS VAR. HOFFMANII STREPTANTHUS LEMMONII STREPTANTHUS MORRISONII SSP. HIRTIFLORUS STREPTANTHUS NIGER STREPTANTHUS SPARSIFLORUS STREPTANTHUS SQUAMIFORMIS THELYPODIUM REPANDUM THELYPODIUM TEXANUM WAREA CARTER I WAREA SESSILIFOLIA ANCISTROCACTUS TOBJSCHII CEREUS ERIOPHORUS VAR. FRAGRANS CEREUS GRACILIS VAR. AbORIGlNUM CEREUS GRACILIS VAR. SIMPSONII CEREUS ROBINII VAR. DEERINGII CEREUS ROBINII VAR. ROBINII CORYPHANTHA MINIMA CORYPHANTHA RAMILLOSA CORYPHANTHA STROBIL1FORMIS VAR. DURISPINA ECHINOCACTUS HORIZONTHALONIUS VAR. NICHOLII ECHINOCEREUS CHLORANTHUS VAR. NEOCAPILLUS ECHINOCEREUS ENGELMANNII VAR. HOWEI ECHINOCEREUS ENGELMANNII VAR. PURPUREUS ECHINOCEREUS LLOYDII ECHINOCEREUS REICHENBACHI I VAR. ALBERTII ECHINOCEREUS TRIGLOCHIDIATUS VAR. ARIZONICUS ECHINOCEREUS VIRIDIFLORUS VAR. DAVISII FEROCACTUS VIRIDESCENS NEOLLOYDIA GAUTII NEOLLOYDIA MARIPOSENSIS OPUNTIA BA5ILARIS VAR. TRELEASEI PEDIOCACTUS BRADYI PEDIOCACTUS KNOWLTONII PEDIOCACTUS PEEBLESIANUS VAR. PEEBLESIANUS PEDIOCACTUS SILERI SCLEROCACTUS GLAUCUS CAMPANULA CALIFQRNICA ARIZONA ALASKA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA ARIZONA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA TEXAS OKLAHOMA, ARKANSAS IDAHO TEXAS FLORIDA FLORIDA. ALABAMA TEXAS FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS ARIZONA TEXAS CALIFORNIA UTAH TEXAS, NEW MEXICO TEXAS ARIZONA TEXAS CALIFORNIA TEXAS TEXAS CALIFORNIA, ARIZONA ARIZONA NEW MEXICO ARIZONA ARIZONA UTAH, COLORADO CALIFORNIA 54 FAMILY LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE SPECIES CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES STATE CAMPANULACEAE CAPRIFOLIACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CARYOPHYLLACEAE CELASTRACEAE CHENOPODIACEAE CHENOPODIACEAE CHENOPODIACEAE CHENOPODIACEAE CISTACEAE CISTACEAE CONVOLVULACEAE CONVOLVULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CRASSULACEAE CUPRESSACEAE IUSCUTACEAE lYCADACEAE LEGENERE LlMOSA VIBURNUM BRACTEATUM ARENARIA ALABAMENSIS ARfNARIA URSINA CERASTIUM ARVENSE VAR. VILLOSI SSIMUM CERASTIUM CLAWSONII GEOCARPON MINIMUM PARONYCHIA CHARTACEA PARONYCHIA CONGESTA PARONYCHIA MACCART I I PARONYCHIA RUGELII VAR. INTERIOR SILENE APERTA SILENE DOUGLASII VAR. ORARIA SILENE MARMORENSIS SILENE PLANKII SILENE POLYPETALA SILENE RECTIRAMEA SILENE SPALDINGII STELLARIA IRRIGUA FORSELLESIA PUNGENS VAR. GLABRA ATRIPLEX GRIFFITHSII ATRIPLEX KLEBERGORUM NITROPHILA MOHAVENSIS SUAEDA DURIPES HUDSONIA ERICOIDES SSP. MONTANA LECHEA MARITIMA VAR. VIRGINICA IPOMOEA EGREGIA IPOMOEA LEMMONI DUDLEYA BETTINAE DUDLEYA CANDELABRUM DUDLEYA CYMOSA SSP. MARCESCENS DUDLEYA MULTICAULIS DUDLEYA NESIOTICA DUDLEYA STOLONIFERA ECHEVERIA COLLOMAE ECHEVERIA RUSBYI PARVISEDUM LEIOCARPUM SEDUM NEVII SEDUM ROSEA VAR. ROANENSIS SEDUM TEXANUM CUPRESSUS GOVENIANA VAR. ABRAMSIANA CUSCUTA HOWELL I ANA 2AMIA INTEGRIFOLIA CALIFORNIA ALABAMA* GEORGIA ALABAMA CALIFORNIA PENNSYLVANIA TEXAS MISSOURI. ARKANSAS FLORIDA TEXAS TEXAS FLORIDA, GEORGIA CALIFORNIA OREGON CALIFORNIA TEXAS. NEW MEXICO FLORIDA, GEORGIA ARIZONA WASHINGTON, OREGON, IDAHO, MONTANA COLORADO CALIFORNIA ARIZONA TEXAS CALIFORNIA TEXAS NORTH CAROLINA VIRGINIA ARIZONA ARIZONA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA ARIZONA ARIZONA CALIFORNIA ALABAMA, TENNESSEE NORTH CAROLINA, TENNESSEE TEXAS CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA FLORIDA 55 46-265 O - 75 - 5 FAMILY CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE CYPERACEAE D1APENSIACEAE DIAPENSIACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERICACEAE ERIOCAULACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE EUPHORBIACEAE LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE CAREX ABORIG1NUM CAREX ALBIDA CAREX ELACHYCARPA CAREX JACOBI-PETERI CAREX SPECUICOLA CAREX TOMPKINSII ELEOCHARIS CYLINDRICA FIMBRISTYLIS PERPUSILLA RHYNCHOSPORA CALIFORNICA RHYNCHOSPORA CRINIPES RHYNCHOSPORA KNIESKERNII SCIRPUS ANCISTROCHAETUS SHORTIA GALACIFOLIA VAR. BREVISTYLA SHORTIA GALACIFOLIA VAR. GALACIFOLIA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS ANDERSONII VAR. PALLIDA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS AURICULATA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS BAKERI ARCTOSTAPHYLOS DENSIFLORA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS FRANCISCANA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS GLANDULOSA VAR. CRASSIFOLIA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS GLUTINOSA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS HEARSTIORUM ARCTOSTAPHYLOS MYRTIFOLlA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS PACIFICA ARCTOSTAPHYLOS PUMILA ELLIOTTU RACEMOSA KALMIA CUNEATA MONOTROPSIS REYNOLDSIAE RHODODENDRON CHAPMANII ERIOCAULON KORNICKIANUM ANDRACHNE ARIDA ARGYTHAMNIA APHOROIDES ARGYTHAMNIA ARGYRAEA CHAMAESYCE (EUPHORBIA) DELTOIDEA SSP. SERPYLLUM CHAMAESYCE (EUPHORBIA) PORTERIANA VAR. KEYENSIS CHAMAESYCE(EUPHORBIA) PORTERIANA VAR. SCOPARIA CROTON ALABAMENSIS CROTON ELLIOTTU CROTON GLANDULOSUS VAR. SIMPSONII CROTON WIGGINSII DITAXIS DIVERSIFLORA EUPHORBIA FENDLERI VAR. TRILIGULATA IDAHO CALIFORNIA MAINE ALASKA ARIZONA CALIFORNIA TEXAS GEORGIA CALIFORNIA ALABAMA NEb JERSEY, DELAWARE VERMONT SOUTH CAROLINA, NORTH CAROLINA NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH CAROLINA, GEORGIA, VIRGINIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA GEORGIA, SOUTH CAROLINA NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH CAROLINA FLORIDA FLORIDA TEXAS, ARKANSAS, OKLAHOMA TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA ALABAMA, TENNESSEE FLORIDA, GEORGIA, ALAOAMA FLORIDA CALIFORNIA, NEVADA NEVADA TEXAS 56 LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE EUPHORBIA GARBERI EUPHORBIA GOLONDRINA EUPHORBIA PLATYSPERMA MANIHOT WALKERAE PHYLLANTHUS ERICOIDES ACACIA EMORYANA ASTRAGALUS AMNIS-AMISSI ASTRAGALUS ATRATUS VAR. INSEPTUS ASTRAGALUS BEATHII ASTRAGALUS BEATLEYAE ASTRAGALUS CALYCOSUS VAR. MONOPHYLLIDIUS ASTRAGALUS CASTETTLRI ASTRAGALUS CLARIANUS ASTRAGALUS CREMNOPHYLAX ASTRAGALUS CRONQUISTII ASTRAGALUS DETERIOR ASTRAGALUS DETRITALIS ASTRAGALUS HAMlLTONII ASTRAGALUS HARRISONII ASTRAGALUS JAEGER I ANUS ASTRAGALUS JOHANNI S-HOWELLI I ASTRAGALUS KENTROPHYTA VAR. DOUGLASII ASTRAGALUS LENTIGINOSUS VAR. MARICOPAE ASTRAGALUS LOANUS ASTRAGALUS LUTOSUS ASTRAGALUS MALACOIDES ASTRAGALUS MICROCYMBUS ASTRAGALUS M1NTHORNIAE VAR. GRACILIOR ASTRAGALUS MISELLUS VAR. PAUPER ASTRAGALUS MONOENSIS ASTRAGALUS NATURITENSIS ASTRAGALUS NYENSIS ASTRAGALUS OSTERHOUTII ASTRAGALUS PARDALINUS ASTRAGALUS PHOENIX ASTRAGALUS PORRECTUS ASTRAGALUS PROIMANTHUS ASTRAGALUS PURSHI1 VAR. OPHlOGENES ASTRAGALUS RAVENII ASTRAGALUS ROBBINSI! VAR. ALPINIFORMIS ASTRAGALUS ROBBINSI I VAR. JESUPI ASTRAGALUS ROBBINSI I VAR. OCCIDENTALIS ASTRAGALUS SAURINUS FLORIDA TEXAS CALIFORNIA TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS IDAHO IDAHO ARIZONA NEVADA NEVADA NEW MEXICO CALIFORNIA ARIZONA UTAH COLORADO UTAH. COLORADO UTAH UTAH CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA WASHINGTON, UREGON ARIZONA UTAH UTAH, COLORADO UTAH COLORADO UTAH WASHINGTON CALIFORNIA COLORADO NEVADA COLORADO UTAH NEVADA NEVADA WYOMING IDAHO, OREGOI1 CALIFORNIA OREGON NEW HAMPSHIRE, VERMOI.T NEVADA UTAH 57 FAMILY FARACEAE FARACEAE FARACEAE FAflACEAE FARACEAE FABACEAE FABACFAE FABACFAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACFAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FARACEAE FABACEAE FARACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE FABACEAE LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE SPECIES ASTRAGALUS SCHMOLLAt ASTRAGALUS SERENOI VAR. SORDESCENS ASTRAGALUS SERPENS ASTRAGALUS SILICEUS ASTRAGALUS SINUATUS ASTRAGALUS STERILIS ASTRAGALUS TENER VAR. TITI ASTRAGALUS UNCIALIS ASTRAGALUS XIPHOIDES BAPTISIA ARACHNIFERA BAPTISIA RIPARIA BRONGNIARTIA MINUTIFOLIA CALLIANDRA BIFLORA CASSIA KEYENSIS CENTROSEMA ARENICOLA GALACTIA PINETORUM GENISTIDIUM DUMOSUM HOFFMANNSEGGIA TENELLA LATHYRUS HITCHCOCKIANUS LESPLDEZA LEPTOSTACHYA LOTUS ARGOPHYLLUS VAR. ADSURGENS LOTUS SCOPARIUS SSP. TRASKIAE LUPINUS BURKEI SSP. CAERULEOMONTANUS LUPINUS DURANII LUPINUS GUADALUPENSIS LUPINUS LUDOVICIANUS LUPINUS MILO-BAKERI LUPINUS TIDESTROMII VAR. LAYNEAE LUPINUS TIDESTROMII VAR. TIDESTROMII LUPINUS TRACYI OXYTROPIS GLABERRIMA OXYTROPIS KOBUKENSIS OXYTROPIS OBNAPIFORMIS PETALOSTEMUM FOLIOSUM PETALOSTEMUM REVERCHONII PETALOSTEMUM SABINALE PETALOSTEMUM SCARIOSUM SOPHORA FORMOSA TEPHROSIA ANGUSTISSIMA TRIFOLIUM AMOENUM TRIFOLIUM ANDERSONII SSP. BEATLEYAE TRIFOLIUM LEMMONII TRIFOLIUM POLYODON CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES STATE COLORADO NEVADA UTAH NEW MEXICO WASHINGTON OREGON, IDAHO CALIFORNIA NEVADA ARIZONA GEORGIA FLORIDA TEXAS TEXAS FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA TEXAS TEXAS CALIFORNIA, NEVADA ILLINOIS, WISCONSIN, IOWA, MINNESOTA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA OREGON CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA ALASKA ALASKA UTAH, COLORADO ILLINOIS, TENNESStE, ALABAMA TEXAS TEXAS NEW MEXICO ARIZONA FLORIDA CALIFORNIA NEVADA CALIFORNIA, NEVADA, COLORADO CALIFORNIA 58 LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE TRIFOLIUM THOMPSONII TRIFOLIUM TRICHOCALYX VICIA OCALENSIS CASTANEA OZARKENSIS OUCRCUS GRACIL1FORMIS OUERCUS HINCKLEYI OUERCUS TARDIFOLIA FRANKENIA JOHNSTONII CORYDALIS AOUAE-GELIDAE DICENTRA FORMOSA SSP. OREGANA DICENTRA OCHROLEUCA BARTONIA TEXANA CENTAURIUM NAMOPHILUM FRASERA GYPSICOLA FRASERA PAHUTENSIS GENTIANA BISETAEA GENTIANA DELOACHII GENTIANA PENNELLIANA GERANIUM TOQUIMENSE ERIODICTYON ALTISSIMUM ERIODICTYON CAPITATUM HYDROPHYLLUM CAPITATUM VAR, THOMPSONII PHACELIA ARGILLACEA PHACELIA BEATLEYAE PHACELIA CAPITATA PHACELIA COOKEI PHACELIA FILIFORMIS PHACELIA FORMOSULA PHACELIA MAMMILLARENSIS PHACELIA PALLIDA PHACELIA WELSHII HYPERICUM CUMULICOLA IRIS TENAX SSP. KLAMATHENSIS IRIS TENUIS ISOETES LITHOPHYLLA ISOETES LOUISIANENSIS JUGLANS HINDSII ACANTHOMINTHA ILICIFOLIA ACANTHOMINTHA OBOVATA SSP. DUTTONII BRAZORIA PULCHERRIMA CONRADINA BREVIFOLIA CONRADINA GLABRA CONRADINA VERTICILLATA WASHINGTON CALIFORNIA FLORIDA MISSOURI. ARKANSAS), OKLAHUMA TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS TEXAS OREGON CALIFORNIA, OREGOh CALIFORNIA TEXAS CALIFORNIA, NEVADA NEVADA, UTAH NEVADA OREGON GEORGIA FLORIDA NEVADA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA OREGON, WASHINGTON UTAH NEVADA OREGON CALIFORNIA ARIZONA COLORADO UTAH TEXAS ARIZONA FLORIDA CALIFORNIA OREGON TEXAS LOUISIANA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA TEXAS FLORIDA FLORIDA KENTUCKY, TENNESSEE 59 FAMILY LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LAMIACEAE LENTIBULARIACtAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE DICERANDRA FRUTESCENS DICERANDRA IMMACULATA HEDEOMA GRAVEOLENS MACBR1DEA ALBA MONARDELLA LINOIDES SSP. VIMINtA MONARDELLA MACRANTHA VAR. HALLII MONARDELLA PRINGLEI MONARDELLA UNDULATA VAR. FRUTESCENS PHYSOSTEGIA CORRELLII POGOGYNE ABRAMSII POGOGYNE DOUGLASII SSP. PARVIFLORA PYCNANTHEMUM CURVIPES SALVIA BLODGETTII SALVIA COLUMBARIAE VAR. ZIEGLERI SALVIA GREATAE TRICHOSTEMA AUSTROMONTAUUM SSP. COMPACTUM PINGUICULA IONANTHA AGAVE ARIZONICA AGAVE MCKELVEYANA AGAVE SCHOTTII VAR. TRELEASEI ALLIUM AASEAE ALLIUM DICTUON ALLIUM HICKMANII ALLIUM PASSEYI BRODIAEA CORONARIA VAR. ROSEA BRODIAEA FILIFOLIA BRODIAEA ORCUTTII BRODIAEA PALLIDA CALOCHORTUS CLAVATUS SSP. RECURVIFOL IUS CALOCHORTUS COERULEUS VAR. WESTONII CALOCHORTUS T1BURONENSIS CHLOROGALUM GRANDIFLORUM CHLOROGALUM PURPUREUM VAR. PURPUREUM CHLOROGALUM PURPUREUM VAR. REDUCTUM ERYTHRONIUM GRANDIFLORUM SSP. PUSATERII FRITILLARIA PHAEANTHERA FRITILLARIA RODERICKII HARPEROCALLIS FLAVA HYMENOCALLIS CORONARIA HYPOXIS LONGII LILIUM IRIDOLLAE LILIUM OCCIDENTALE FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA TEXAS CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA GEORGIA, ALABAMA, TENNESSEE. NORTH CAROLINA FLORIDA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA FLORIDA ARIZONA ARIZONA ARIZONA IDAHO WASHINGTON CALIFORNIA UTAH CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA FLORIDA ALABAMA, GEORGIA, FLORIDA, SOUTH CAROLINA VIRGINIA ALABAMA, FLORIDA OREGON, CALIFORNIA 60 FAMILY LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE LILIACEAE •LILIACEAE LIMNANTHACEAE LIMNANTHACEAE LIMNANTHACEAE LINACEAE LINACEAE LINACEAE LINACEAE LINACEAE LINACEAE LOASACEAE LOASACEAE LOGANIACEAE LOGANIACEAE LYTHRACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MALVACEAE MELASTOMATACEAE NYCTAGINACEAE NYCTAGINACEAE NYCTAGINACEAE NYCTAGINACEAE OLEACEAE OLEACEAE LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE LILIUM PITKINENSE LILIUM WASHINGTON1ANUM VAR. MINUS NOLINA ATOPOCARPA NOLINA BRITTONIANA NOLINA INTERRATA POLIANTHES RUNYONII TOFIELDIA GLUTINOSA SSP. ABSONA TRILLIUM PUSILLUM VAR. VIRGINIANUM VERATRUM WOOD II LIMNANTHES BAKERI LIMNANTHES GRACILIS VAR. PARISHII LIMNANTHES VINCULANS HESPEROLINON CONGESTUM HESPEROL1NON DIDYMOCARPUM LINUM ARENICOLA LINUM CARTEHI VAR. CARTERI LINUM CARTERI VAR. SMALLII LINUM WESTIl MENTZELlA LEUCOPHYLLA MENTZELlA NITENS VAR. LEPTOCAULIS SPIGELIA GENTIANOIDES SPIGELIA LOGANIOIDES CUPHEA ASPERA CALLIRHOE SCABRIUSCULA GAYA VIOLACEA HIBISCUS CALIFORNICUS HIBISCUS DASYCALYX ILIAMNA REMOTA LAVATERA ASSURGENTIFLORA MALAC07HAMNUS CLEMENT I NUS MALACOTHAMNUS FASCICULATUS MALACOTHAMNUS PALMERI VAR. INVOLUCRATUS SIDALCEA CAMPESTRIS SIDALCEA COVILLEI SIDALCEA NELSONIANA SPHAERALCEA FENDLERI VAR. ALBESCENS RHEXIA PARVIFLORA ABRONIA ALPINA ALLIONIA CRISTATA MIRABILIS MACFARLANEI MIRABILIS PUDICA FORESTIERA SEGREGATA VAR. PINETORUM FRAXINUS GOODDINGII CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA. OREGON FLORIDA FLORIDA CALIFORNIA TEXAS IDAHO VIRGINIA. MARYLAND FLORIDA, GEORGIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA NEVADA, CALIFORNIA ARIZONA FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA TEXAS TEXAS CALIFORNIA TEXAS ILLINOIS, INDIANA, VIRGINIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA OREGON CALIFORNIA ORtGON ARIZONA FLORIDA, GEORGIA CALIFORNIA ARIZONA OREGON, IDAHO NEVADA FLORIDA ARIZONA 61 FAMILY ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ONAGRACEAE ORCHIDACEAE ORCHIDACEAE ORCHIOACEAE ORCHIDACEAE ORCHIDACEAE PAPAVERACEAE PAPAVERACEAE PAPAVERACEAE PLUMBAGINACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE "POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE 'POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE LIST OF ENDANGERED SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES SPECIES STATE CAMISSONIA GUADALUPENSIS SSP. CLEMENTINA CAMISSONIA MEGALANTHA CAMISSONIA NEVADENSIS CAMISSONIA SPECUICOLA SSP. SPECUICOLA CLARKIA FRANCISCANA CLARKIA IMBRICATA CLARKIA SPECIOSA SSP. IMMACULATA EPILOBIUM NIVIUM GAURA NEOMEXICANA SSP. COLORADENSIS OENOTHERA AVITA SSP. EUREKENSIS OENOTHERA DELTOIDES VAR. HOWELLII OENOTHERA PSAMMOPHILA ISOTRIA MEDEOLOIDES PLATANTHERA UNALASKENSIS SSP. MARITIMA SPIRANTHES LANCEOLATA VAR. PALUDICOLA TRIPHORA CRAIGHEADII TRIPHORA LATIFOLIA ARCTOMECON HUMILIS ARGEMONE PLEIACANTHA SSP, PlNNATISECTA ESCHSCHOLZIA RAMOSA LIMONIUM CAROLINIANUM VAR. ANGUSTATUM AGROSTIS BLASDALEI VAR. MARINENSIS ANDROPOGON ARCTATUS ARISTIDA FLORIDANA CALAMAGROSTIS INEXPANSA VAR. NOVAE-ANGL I AE CALAMAGROSTIS INSPERATA CALAMAGROSTIS PERPLEXA CALAMOVlLFA ARCUATA CALAMOVILFA CURTISSII DIGITARIA PAUCIFLORA GLYCERIA NUBIGENA MUHLENBERGIA VILLOSA NEOSTAPFIA COLUSANA ORCUTTIA CALIFORNICA VAR. CALIFORNICA ORCUTTIA CALIFORNICA VAR. INAEOUALIS ORCUTTIA CALIFORNICA VAR. VlSCIDA ORCUTTIA MUCRONATA ORCUTTIA PILOSA ORCUTTIA TENUIS PANICUM HIRSTII PANICUM MUNDUM CALIFORNIA NEVADA, UTAH NEVADA ARIZONA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA WYOMING. COLORADO CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA IDAHO RHODt ISLAND, NEW HAMPSHIRE. VERMONT, MASSACHUSETTS, NEk YORK, CONNECTICUT, PENNSYLVANIA, VIRGINIA, ILLINOIS, MISSOURI. NEW JERSEY, NORTH CAROLINA, MICHIGAN CALIFORNIA, OREGON FLORIDA FLORIDA FLORIDA ARIZONA, UTAH NEW MEXICO CALIFORNIA FLORIDA CALIFORNIA FLORIDA, ALAUAMA FLORIDA MAINE. VERMONT, NEW HAMPSHIRE OHIO. MISSOURI NEW YORK TENNESSEE. OKLAHOMA FLORIDA FLORIDA NORTH CAROLINA, TENNESSEE TEXAS CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA GEORGIA, NEW JERSEY VIRGINIA. NORTH CAROL INA 62 FAMILY POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POACEAE POLEMONIACEAE POLEMONIACEAE POLEMONIACEAE POLEMONIACEAE POLEMONIACEAE POLEMONIACEAE POLEMONIACEAE POLEMO