Nazr Mohammed has the starting center job with the Knicks all but locked up.

If your league requires you to start a center, Mohammed could be worth a late-round pick.

Related

Nazr Mohammed

“From here on out, I think we’ll stay with Nazr [Mohammed at center],” coach Lenny Wilkens said yesterday.

The Knicks will start a lineup featuring Kurt Thomas, Tim Thomas, and Mohammed up front, with Allan Houston and Stephon Marbury at guard. Mohammed should be picked up if you are weak at center.

Related

Nazr Mohammed

It sounds like there’s a good chance Nazr Mohammed, who turned down a contract extension before the season and played sparingly in the playoffs, won’t be back with the Spurs next season.

If the Spurs do re-sign Mohammed, then Rasho Nesterovic probably would be traded. The small-ball era is upon us, and it seems unlikely that teams will continue to invest so much money in centers when the key to winning appears to be dominant point guards and speed. However, Mohammed could still be a hot commodity as teams still need some size if they’re going to contend with guys like Shaquille O’Neal and Amare Stoudemire. From a fantasy standpoint, productive centers could be even tougher to come by next year, increasing the value of the few that get it done.

Related

Nazr Mohammed

Kendrick Perkins (knee) did not take part in Saturday’s light practice, but he feels better and remains day-to-day.

Beat writer Darnell Mayberry says he has “reason to believe” that Perkins will return to action on Sunday. Nazr Mohammed would start at center if Perkins is unable to go.

Kendrick Perkins left Game 4 on Saturday with a strained right hip, and he will not return.

The injury didn’t appear too serious, so hopefully it’s a minor ailment that will heal in time for OKC’s next game. If they win on Saturday, completing their sweep of the Mavs, they’ll have tons of time to recuperate.

Kendrick Perkins (knee) will miss the Thunder game on Friday against the Warriors.

Perkins knocked knees with another player during the Thunder’s game against the Rockets on Wednesday. Nazr Mohammed will get the start in his place, but is not someone who needs to be on your fantasy radar unless Perkins is ruled out for an extended period.

Kendrick Perkins left Monday’s game after appearing to aggravate his hip injury, that had him a bit questionable coming in, and went straight to the locker room.

He wasn’t on a minutes count or said to be limited, but he went up for a dunk and was clearly in pain when he came back down. It’s likely an aggravation of his previous injury, but could also be his groin. Either way, Serge Ibaka’s value in this series just went through the roof, while Nick Collison and Nazr Mohammed are also going to get plenty of run for as long as Perkins is out. Update: Perkins is back on the bench and available if needed, but whether he’ll play again in this blowout remains to be seen.