18-year NBA veteran Nazr Mohammed isn’t done with the league just yet; he’s back, but not as a player. Mohammed announced Monday that, since Nov. 20, he’s been with the Oklahoma City Thunder in a front office role. He announced the news via the Players Tribune in a piece called I’m Back (Again):

As of November 20, I became a professional evaluation scout/identification and intelligence for the Oklahoma City Thunder. I know it’s a mouthful, but essentially I’m going to get a full education in all of the little details needed to make a front office tick.

A lot of people in the Thunder organization made this an easy decision — especially Sam Presti. I’ve known Sam since our San Antonio days, and I highly respect him and what he’s done. The OKC culture is really something else. This is a great opportunity to learn all the aspects of the business and become a well-rounded basketball executive. Yes, one day I’d like to aim for a GM spot, but not for a little while. During my career, I used to go around saying, “I want to be a GM.” Now that seems pretty bold — maybe even a little naive. It’s easy to think, from the outside, that the job of GM is mostly about signing players and conducting trades. In reality, there’s so much more to it. There are so many moving parts and considerations that all vary depending on what organization you’re with and what’s going on in the league at the time.

Still, my experience playing this game has given me a perspective that I think can help build a successful team. Talent is crucial to winning championships, but maybe even more important is establishing a culture that values character and a strong work ethic. I believe you can find all those qualities in one individual, you just have to know what to look for. I’ve been in a championship locker rooms at the collegiate (1996 and 1998 NCAA Champion at Kentucky) and the professional level (2005 NBA champion with the Spurs) so I know what it looks and feels like. I’m really proud of these accomplishments, and now I’m just looking forward to channeling those experiences into this new challenge.

So I realize now how much I have to learn, and I see my new position as a chance to be a student in the Business of Basketball 101. That’s the best part of my new job. I love to be a sponge, soaking up new things about the game of basketball. It almost feels like I’m going back to college. Studying, taking notes, asking questions, and learning new terminology, lingo and processes.

Mohammed, 40, was a journeyman as a player; he spent time with the Philadelphia 76ers, Atlanta Hawks, New York Knicks, San Antonio Spurs, Detroit Pistons, Charlotte Hornets (then Bobcats), Chicago Bulls and Thunder.

He retired with career averages of 5.8 points and 4.7 rebounds per game.