NAZR Mohammed wasn’t used to the quiet. That was the worst part of going to work every day as a member of the Atlanta Hawks, the NBA’s version of the witness-protection program.

Bad enough to play for a lousy team. Bad enough to play in a lousy sports town, one that barely cares about its good teams, let alone its miserable ones. Worse to play inside Philips Arena in front of what felt like a few hundred friends and family members.

“That,” Mohammed said, “wasn’t what I was used to at all.”

Mohammed had logged three years in Lexington, Ky., where basketball is king and the men who wear Kentucky uniforms are unquestioned princes of all they see. Some players shake their head when they get their first look at the fervent devotions Wildcats fans bring to Rupp Arena. Mohammed, he felt as if he’d found a home.

“I missed that,” he said yesterday, a few hours before Mohammed and the Knicks would play the Celtics in a suddenly critical game at the Garden.

“It’s what most excited me about coming to New York. I know I’ve always seemed to play well at the Garden, because the electricity inside was so amazing. It’s a great feeling playing in that building anyway. But especially as a member of the Knicks … wow! That’s all I can say. Wow!”

Mohammed is the key in determining how much of Isiah Thomas’ mid-winter roster reshuffling was the product of a brilliant mad scientist, and how much was the result of throwing spaghetti against the wall to see what sticks.

No one will ever doubt the wisdom of Thomas’ boldest moves, trading for Stephon Marbury, hiring Lenny Wilkens. Those were the easiest kinds of no-brainers. The Knicks had been without a true star point guard since Micheal Ray Richardson was a kid. They’d been without a legitimate coach since Jeff Van Gundy left the building.

Those were the easy moves. Those were the simple decisions.

More complicated was the way Thomas flipped over the rug at the All-Star Game 3½ weeks ago. The Knicks were playing better. They were locked in at making a run at .500. They had the city talking about playoff basketball again, about climbing in the woeful Eastern Conference, about maybe even stealing a round or two, since the chemistry seemed to be clicking so well.

Then Thomas pressed a button, blew it all up. Gone were Keith Van Horn and Michael Doleac. In came Mohammed and Tim Thomas. It was a curious decision, compounded by the six-game losing streak that not only halted the Knicks’ ascent in the conference, but also put their very playoff lives in danger.

“It’s always tough getting used to a new team,” Mohammed. “But especially when that new team starts losing as soon as you show up.”

Said Marbury, “It takes a while for guys to get used to each other. But the payoff can be pretty special if you work at it. I always knew Nazr was a terrific player, but seeing him every day now I know just how good he can really be.”

How good is that? If the three-game winning streak the Knicks brought into last night’s game is any indication, it’s hard to put a ceiling on. Mohammed played 40 or minutes in all three games, hit double figures in scoring three times and rebounding twice. Suddenly, it matters less and less if Tim Thomas comes up short in relative skill level to Van Horn. Because Mohammed may turn out to be the best jewel of the bunch.

“What amazes me is how good his offense has turned out to be,” Marbury said. “He can really score the ball.”