Title: The Road

Author: Cormac McCarthy

Genre: Science Fiction, Post Apocalyptic, Dystopia

First published: September 26th 2006

Finished reading: May 9th 2014

Pages: 284

“He walked out in the gray light and stood and he saw for a brief moment the absolute truth of the world. The cold relentless circling of the intestate earth. Darkness implacable. The blind dogs of the sun in their running. The crushing black vacuum of the universe. And somewhere two hunted animals trembling like ground-foxes in their cover. Borrowed time and borrowed world and borrowed eyes with which to sorrow it.”

I actually confused this book with a different movie (which I detested and apparently don’t remember the name of), so I’m really glad I decided to pick up The Road anyway. Once I started reading, I quickly realized my mistake and recognized it as a whole different movie I saw only a part of and besides a long time ago. But I remember the images were strong and impressive. And so is this book. Although we never get to know where the story is set nor the names of the main characters, Cormac McCarthy is able to make us sympathize with them. The Road is a story about a father and a boy, making there way down south in a post apocalyptic world… A story about determination, survival and the love of a father for his son.

We follow the father and son on a difficult journey south, where the cold weather, desperation, lack of food and the destruction seen in the post apocalyptic world make it difficult to go on. There is a sense of hopelessness in it all, but nevertheless the father never gives up, and tries to convince his son to do the same. They find all kind of obstacles on their way, and death is never far away… There is hardly any soul left, and most of them are the bad guys. The father wants them to reach the sea, and sees that location as their salvation. But when they finally arrive, he soon finds out he was wrong. That live in the post apocalyptic world is like a neverending circle full of hopelessness… And the only thing that keeps them alive is the bond they share.