Meet Chengdu

Chengdu is the capital of China’s Sichuan Province and is one of the three most-populous cities in the Western area of the country. Located in central Sichuan, Chengdu has an urban population of more than 16 million and is a hub for railways and telecommunications for southwestern China. Chengdu and Phoenix established a sister city relationship in 1987.

Chengdu is among the oldest cities in the world. Archeological evidence indicates Chengdu was inhabited more than four thousand years ago, in the 10th century BC. During this time period, the town was home to an ancient bronze-wielding culture, which later become known as the Shu. Now, Chengdu is known as the Panda Capital. It home to the Chengdu Research Base of Giant Panda Breeding, a non-profit and world-renowned panda breeding center with more than 100 pandas.

Chengdu International Sister Cities Sculptures Creation Program:

Please email completed reply form to Qing at: qingzhang0717@sina.com.

Sculptures Creation Program Reply Form.

More information:

Invitation Letter from Chengdu

Chengdu International Sister Cities Sculpture Works

A Brief Introduction to Chengdu

Learn more about Chengdu:

To visit the Chengdu city website, click here.

To see a map of Chengdu, click here.

Learn some Mandarin:

http://www.chinese-tools.com/learn/chinese (online – free)

http://www.learn4good.com/great_schools/mandarin_chinese_classes.htm

News

2021 Phoenix Chinese Week’s Virtual Culture and Cuisine Festival

Celebrate Lunar New Year 4719, the year of the Ox from the comfort and safety of your home. Enjoy our online showcase of cultural, educational, and fun activities for the entire family.

Chengdu Debate Visit Team 2017

On Tuesday, Maggie and Melody joined Chris Jordan at Phoenix City Hall for a workshop on speech and debate. Throughout the morning, the students learned the basics of persuasive delivery and argumentation, followed by some lively practice debates on topics that ranged from the benefits of electronic books to the morals of banning smoking. Having competed in debate at home in the past, both Maggie and Melody built on their strong speaking skills and had a lot of fun.

On Wednesday, the students had a wonderful time shadowing for an entire day at Brophy College Prep. Nico Pacioni and Jack Fyan, two Brophy students and debaters played host to Maggie and Melody for their “typical day” at Brophy. Jack and Nico were thrilled to be reunited with Melody and Maggie; they met at the Chengdu Debate Challenge in June. Maggie and Melody also graciously met with the Brophy and Xavier speech and debate students and explained everything about debate and schooling in China.

Committee

The Phoenix Sister Cities Chengdu Committee fosters and encourages mutual understanding, friendship and a higher quality of life for the people of Phoenix and Chengdu. The committee is bound by a commitment to creating partnerships, conduct exchanges and share expertise that translates into mutually beneficial relationships with citizens, organizations, businesses, and schools in the both communities served. Volunteer members work to promote signature activities, such as Chinese Week and promote collaboration in the areas of trade and tourism, youth and education, arts and culture, and municipal training. The Chengdu Committee meets monthly and welcomes new members.

Chengdu Committee Contact Information

Chairperson: Dianna Noli Hill catenal@cox.net

Staff Liaison: Emily Smolenski emily.smolenski@phoenix.gov

The committee meets every second Wednesday of the month, except July, August, and December.

Meetings begin at 6:00pm and are located at Siu Wok, 2815 N. Central Ave., Phoenix, AZ 85004