Chengdu is considered to be one of China's most liveable cities and is famous for the country's national treasure, the giant panda. Images of this iconic animal decorate the city and the Panda Breeding and Research Centre is a popular place to visit. Chengdu's rich history spans 4500 years and popular sites include Buddhist and Taoist temples and the ancient fortress wall that surrounds the city.

Agreement with City of Gold Coast: Sister City, 2019

Population: Chengdu has jurisdiction over Tianfu New Area (Chengdu), East Chengdu New Area, Chengdu High-tech Zone and other 20 districts (cities) and counties with a registered population of 20 million.

Language: The official language of Chengdu is Mandarin.

Location: Chengdu is the capital of Sichuan Province, located in south west China.

Climate: Spring (March to May): Warm, with frequent alternative temperature changes. Chengdu has up to 300 foggy, cloudy and rainy days per year.

Summer (June to September): Humid, with lower temperatures in early morning and evening, but hot during the day. 75% of the yearly rainfall occurs in the summer.

Autumn (October to November): Best time of year to visit Chengdu. Sharp and frequent temperature changes, a few chilly days could be followed by relatively hot weather.

Winter (December to February): Winter is usually cold, damp and grey, with little rainfall. Chengdu has the least days of sunshine in China.

Distance from the Gold Coast: Approximately 10 hours by plane.

Local time: The local time of Chengdu (and the whole of mainland China) is Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) +8, which makes it only 2 hours behind the Gold Coast.

Discover Chengdu

Home of the Giant Panda and a city of gastronomy, Chengdu is an exciting, modern city popular with tourists from around the world. The famous Sichuan food has to be sampled and Chengdu locals will happily share their passion for spicy hotpot. Spend a relaxing afternoon in a teahouse, go shopping along Chunxi Road, visit Dujiangyan Irrigation Project, walk the back alleys to watch locals play mah-jong or spend your evening watching a Sichuan opera performance.