In The News

Nobel laureate Sir Andrew Huxley passes away

THE death has taken place of the scientist Sir Andrew Huxley, He was 94.

Sir Andrew shared the Nobel prize for physiology or medicine in 1963 with Sir Alan Hodgkin, with whom he had closely collaborated, and with Australian scientist Sir John Eccles.

They had received the prize for unravelling the biophysical mechanism of the nerve impulse.

Huxley and Hodgkin had first begun collaborating in the late 1930s but their work had to be suspended during the war years when Sir Andrew was involved in number of projects including work on radar research.

After the war the two scientists resumed their research into how nerve impulses were transmitted by the body. Their work necessitated the development of specialist equipment which in many cases was not only designed by Sir Andrew, but also built by him.

The scientists were eventually able to explain the complex process of nerve impulses in what was regarded as a breakthrough of revolutionary proportions.

At this point Sir Andrew was teaching physiology at Cambridge in the 1950s. He then turned his research skills to the matter of muscle contraction. It assist his work Sir Andrew had to design and build new kinds of microscopes.

Sir Andrew was not only one of the country’s great scientists but he was also regarded as being one of the great university administrators. He was appointed master of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1984.

He was president of the Royal Society from 1980 until 1985.

Sir Andrew is survived by his six children. His wife, Lady Richenda, passed away in 2003.

To view an interview with Sir Andrew Huxley, click here.

View previous In the News items: Elvis Presley crypt to be sold at auction, Famous American pilot Evelyn Johnson passes away, Inventor of TV remote control passes away, Singer Robin Gibb passes away, Fans pay tribute to queen of disco Donna Summer, Sculptor George Wyllie passes away, Tributes are paid to the bass guitarist Donald Duck Dunn, War photographer Horst Faas passes away, Celebrity hairdresser Vidal Sassoon passes away, Tributes are paid to author and illustrator Maurice Sendak, Actor and magician John Forrest passes away, Tributes are paid to actress Patricia Medina, World famous poker player Amarillo Slim passes away, Nobel Prize winner Renato Dulbecco passes away, Olympic boxing medalist Terry Spinks passes away, Art world mourns the passing of Louis le Brocquy, Environmentalist Ernest Callenbach passes away, Funeral of tragic mother and daughter to be held, Disability rights campaigner Lord Ashley passes away, Guitar legend Bert Weedon passes away, American TV legend Dick Clark passes away, Tributes are paid to founder of Corrymeela community, Computer pioneer Jack Tramiel passes away, Character actor Luke Askew passes away, Hero of the French Resistance Raymond Aubrac passes away, Popular painter Thomas Kinkade passes away, Music world bids farewell to Banjo Barney, Music world pays tribute to guitar amp maker Jim Marshall, Pinball wizard Steve Kordek passes away, Funeral takes place of former politician Addie Morrow, Banjo player Earl Scruggs passes away, Former pirate radio DJ Tom Lodge passes away, Skateboard innovator Larry Stevenson passes away, Tributes are paid to Scottish darts legend Jocky Wilson, Former aerospace chief Sanford McDonnell passes away, Respected Northern Ireland journalist passes away, Tributes are paid to motorcycle expert Mick Walker, Actress Faith Brook passes away, Chemist who warned of global warming passes away, Illustrator behind the famous Ponderosa map passes away, Ashes of singer Davy Jones to be brought back to UK, Songwriter Robert Sherman passes away, Star Wars artist Ralph McQuarrie passes away, Bishop says Frank Carson was the prime minister of fun, Tributes are paid to Richard Carpenter of Catweazle fame, The actress Marion Mathie passes away or Actor Peter Halliday passes away