Jeffrey Paul Bryant passed away unexpectedly Thursday February 14, 2019 at the age of 56. He was born June 18,1962 in Wayne Michigan to Paul & Marquetta Bryant. We were all blessed to call him our son, grandson, brother, uncle, great-uncle, cousin and friend.

Jeff aka Bean was special in every way. He was born premature and was so tiny that his parents question if he’d survive another day. Jeff proved his strength for life everyday while he lived in an incubator for the first several months of his life. Jeff had a beautiful angel looking over him every step of the way, his old sister Nancy. Jeff did grow and prosper but not like everyone else. He was considered special and blessed us with his charming smile and honesty.

All though Jeff lived a challenging life he always looked on with a giant smile. He was happy and this happiness shinned very bright that everyone noticed. He had a genuine golden heart and would give whatever he had to help you. In fact, Jeff has donated his organs to others in need. His family supported his wishes and look on him with pride.

Jeff enjoyed life and was a joy to be around. You know in the presence of Jeff; you were in for a long interesting story that was either a dream of his or just a tall tale. All the same, he warmed your heart and made you laugh. He had the gift of gab and enjoyed conversations with perfect strangers. Jeff was famous for lighting up the room with hilarious one liners that came out of the blue. There was never a dull moment with Jeff, for his honesty and outspoken personality would surprise most.

Jeff was creative and enjoyed the unusual and outrageous that some would find odd. He followed the beat of his own drum but that’s what was so interesting about Jeff, he didn't care what most thought. We wasn’t trying to change you, he just enjoyed being himself. Jeff will truly be missed but his spirit will always live in our hearts.

Jeff is survived by his parents Paul & Marquetta Bryant; sisters Nancy (Aaron Schroeder) and Sheila (Rich) Story; brother Robert Bryant; nephews Mark (Krista) Tanner and James (Rhonda) Tanner; nieces Janie Story, Lilah Story and Hailey Bryant; great nephews and nieces Elijah Tanner, Reece Tanner, Ariana Tanner, Keegan Tanner, Vaydah Tanner, Marquetta Tanner and Genevieve Tanner; special friend Helen Jankowski. and former brother-in-law James Tanner.

Family will receive friends Sunday at the Castillo Funeral Home 1757 Tremainsville Rd. after 1 PM where a Celebration of Life Ceremony will take place at 4 PM.