Houston Jeffrey “Jeff” Bryant, went home to be with his savior Jesus Christ on March 17, 2024, St. Patrick’s Day. He wanted to make sure he could wish his Father Joe Bryant a happy Birthday face to face.

Jeff was a forever resident in Chattanooga, and called East Ridge his stomping grounds. He was born on July 21, 1954.

Jeff attended Tennessee Tech in Cookeville, Tn., with studies in Business. Jeff loved Jesus Christ to the core of his being. He worshiped and led a small men’s group “Iron Men” at Silverdale Baptist church Bonny Oaks Campus. The Lord allowed many life trials for him over the years to refine his faith. His favorite scripture was Philippians 4:6, "Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God." We were jokingly considering him more like a cat with all the second chances God loved giving him which made him a true testimony to others because he walked the walk. Jeff was a lifelong successful salesman in the computer tech industry working for Barcom for many, many years and considered it his love. He had businesses of his own over the years, as an entrepreneurial salesman to the core. His stress relievers were his motorcycles and riding buddies! He loved to fish and loved to see if the old Dawson boat would make it another year a float. He loved hiking all over our scenic area. He loved the next adventure always.

He was preceded in death by both his loving parents, Joe Bryant and Gloria Bryant.

He is survived by his wife of 23 years, Jennifer Bryant, his children, Jenny Bryant, David (Deedra) Bryant, Houston Bryant and step-son, Charles (Katie) Ford. He has many wonderful grandchildren with another on the way. Hunter, Anakin, Kassidy, Hagan, Jackson and Anderson.

A Celebration of Jeff’s Life will be held in the East Chapel of Chattanooga Funeral Home on Saturday, March 23, at 12 p.m. The family will receive friends on Friday, March 22, from 5-8 p.m. And again on Saturday prior to the service. He will be laid to rest in the Hamilton Memorial Gardens immediately following the service.

Please share your thoughts and memories at www.ChattanoogaEastChapel.com

Chattanooga Funeral Home East Chapel, 404 S. Moore Road, East Ridge, Tn., has been entrusted with the arrangements.