For someone who was coughing up blood in a Paris hotel room three weeks ago, Josh Homme is in surprisingly fine fettle. On February 22, two dates into a European tour, Queens of the Stone Age's leader was stricken with severe bronchitis and forced to fly home to California.

Today, as he nurses a glass of water in a London hotel bar, the only legacy of the ailment is a sporadic barking cough. Previously a 30-a-day smoker, he's now down to three or four, although he exhausts today's ration in the space of an hour. "I guess I get a little antsy in interviews," he drawls.

"Antsy" was not the first adjective that sprang to mind when Homme marched into the bar five minutes earlier, his beefy 6ft 4in frame clad in black, looking like a coppertop Terminator. Nor is his band's music - a dense, dark, psychedelic stew that has seen them acclaimed as the finest American rock group since Nirvana took premature retirement - for the faint-hearted. Point a tape recorder in his direction, though, and he turns unexpectedly bashful.

Like Jeff Tweedy of Wilco or Jason Pierce of Spiritualized, Homme is more of a ringmaster than a showboating frontman. Queens of the Stone Age has always been an amorphous entity, with friends including Foo Fighter Dave Grohl and former Screaming Trees growler Mark Lanegan coming and going, while Homme applies his own have-guitar-will-travel approach to side projects (the Desert Sessions, the Eagles of Death Metal) and guest spots (UNKLE, Auf Der Maur, Martina Topley-Bird).

Whatever QotSA's personnel changes, it was assumed that Homme's bassist and sidekick Nick Oliveri would always be there. The two men used to describe themselves as Jekyll and Hyde: Oliveri, a man with a penchant for getting wasted, naked and arrested, was useful cover for his more discreet bandmate.

Then, last February, Homme drove round to Oliveri's house and sacked him, publicly citing "a number of incidents" that made the partnership unworkable. Oliveri, understandably, was not best pleased. "You know what happens when a pure and original rock band gets polluted, poisoned by hunger for power and control issues?", he fumed on his website. "Things get really out of control."

Homme retorted by telling VH1: "He's a tornado and a tornado just destroys and goes on to the next city. I'm in the tornado clean-up crew and all I ever see is his detritus and I'm sick of it."

Bridges have since been rebuilt. "I understood he was going to get fucking mad," says Homme. "So I got myself ready to take the rocks. But playing music is above friendship. Music is something that's bigger than you are."

Does that require a certain ruthlessness? "I guess that's one of the words. It depends on where you're standing. But sure, why not? I'm the one who gets the knife. Anyone who knows me knows that I would have done everything I could to not fire Nick and that it would be the hardest thing I could do. I still get to go to his house and hang out. That's what's important, not whether he's on the record or not."

Homme says Oliveri's role was "camaraderie" rather than songwriting. Certainly Lullabies to Paralyze, Queens of the Stone Age's uncompromising fourth album, does not suffer from his absence. Lullabies taps into the queasy eldritch intensity of early Black Sabbath rather than the Halloween posturing that subsequently gave heavy metal a bad name. With song titles such as Burn the Witch and Someone's in the Wolf, it adumbrates bad things lurking in the woods.

Homme found inspiration in the fairytales of the Brothers Grimm. "They're not like modern fairtyales where they all live happily ever after. They're warnings." He wags his cigarette ominously. "Don't go in the woods. Listen to your parents."

Its debt to northern European folklore notwithstanding, Lullabies to Paralyze, like all Homme's music, has its roots in the desert. Raised in the golf-and-spa oasis of Palm Desert, this building-contractor's son spent most of his time in the surrounding wilderness, which made him feel "like an ant on a giant rock".

"It is a weird amalgam," he says. "You have people who are surviving on social security beside a giant salt lake where all the fish are dead and floating on the surface of the water, living in trailer parks next to tweakers and people running from the law. But then there's Palm Springs where the snow meets the desert and Liberace and Frank Sinatra had places. I was born with a foot on each side of the line."

At 14, he and schoolfriend Oliveri helped to form Kyuss, who would play their scorched space-rock at impromptu generator parties in the desert. "For me it was natural because I didn't know anything else but in hindsight that was really cool because the kids were like, we won't be stopped. If you don't provide us with something to do, we'll provide ourselves with something to do."

In 1995 Homme pulled the plug on Kyuss (Oliveri had already left) when they were on the verge of a commercial breakthrough. "Sometimes to preserve something you have to destroy it," he says with a logic that you can imagine was lost on his bandmates at the time. An avid student of the reasons bands lose their way, he schemed to make Queens of the Stone Age indestructible.

"I was super-precise in the pre-planning. I thought it would take about three records to really play what I wanted to play and get people used to the idea. I think that if you don't let your ego get too big and your feelings get too touchy you can have this really healthy artistic environment that sustains itself and is unkillable."

Homme's courteous charm masks a rock-like self-confidence. At school, he stood apart from the cliques, getting on with all of them but joining none. As a hulking redhead, blending into the background wasn't an option. "It was always like: stand up straight. Be who you are. That was a reinforced message in my household. Whether you like it or not, you are who you are so you might as well jump on and get with it."

If that makes him sound like a motivational trainer, it's softened by remnants of his acid-in-the-desert days. When he talks about music he's half Carlos Castaneda, half Jack Black in School of Rock: "Humble yourself at the altar of music. Do what it tells you to do." His fondness for contorted analogies and philosophical meandering gets the better of him. He stops what he's saying, throws up his enormous hands and grins. "I don't know where I'm going with that. But I think it was awesome!"

Many of his lyrics are similarly tricky to unravel. Confessional songwriting bores him. "It's been a long while since I loved myself," he whines mockingly. "I'll buy you a journal. Please stop. Don't be a fucking pussy." He catches himself. "You don't have to be macho either, but I like it when songs have multiple layers."

Homme will always chafe against the mainstream, his attitude towards commercial success marked by growing up in a place where ultra-purist punks would accuse a band of selling out just for playing a neighbouring town. You suspect that if you told him exactly what he needed to do to make Queens of the Stone Age the biggest rock band in the world he'd laugh in your face and do the opposite. On Lullabies to Paralyze, he's very proud of getting Brody Dalle and Garbage's Shirley Manson to appear on the same song, only to confine them to 10 barely audible seconds.

This kind of thing tickles him. After all, this is the man who recorded a song (2000's Feel Good Hit of the Summer) with the lyrics "Nicotine, Valium, Vicodin, marijuana, ecstasy and alcohol! Co-co-co-co-co-cocaine!" and then refused to discuss drugs in the press. That takes chutzpah.

He cackles with satisfaction. "To me that's funny and provocative and bizarre. I'm not the kind of guy who'll drop a stink bomb and stand there. What's the fun of standing there? I'd rather be up on the balcony."