Background

First Look Pictures was formed in 1993 as the North American distribution unit of Overseas Filmgroup, a Los Angeles-based film company that was established in 1980. In January 2001, as part of a restructuring, the companies formed a holding company known as First Look Media (not to be confused with the news organization of the same name). In July 2005, First Look Media merged with Capital Entertainment into First Look Studios, which Nu Image acquired a majority stake in in March 2007. In November 2010, First Look went bankrupt; sister company Millennium Films acquired its film library and assets afterwards, reorganizing it as their distribution company.

First Look Pictures

1st Logo (August 25, 1994-January 21, 2000)

Visuals: On a black background, a light blue stylized "F" made of two triangles appears. The words "F I R S T L O O K PICTURES", each below the other, appear one after one. Below is the byline "A Division of Overseas Filmgroup".

Variant: There is a variant with the "F" in the center, "FIRST LOOK PICTURES" above, and "RELEASING" below.

Technique: Motion-controlled animation.

Audio: An orchestra winding up with an "Ahem!" and a ding, or none.

Availability: It appears on Mesmer, A Map of the World, Party Girl, Antonia's Line, and other films; some international releases contain the Overseas Filmgroup logo.

2nd Logo (September 10, 1999-2001)

Visuals: Essentially just the words "FIRST", "LOOK", and "PICTURES" in an Arial Black font stacked on top of each other, in varying sizes to match their length, on a white background.

Variant: There is an inverted variant with a larger logo. This can be seen on the 2000 VHS release of Full Disclosure and a trailer on the 2000 VHS release of Alegria.

Technique: A still, digital graphic.

Audio: None.

Availability: Seen on The Wedding Party, Something More, and the 2000 VHS release of Quiet Days in Hollywood.

First Look Media

Logo (2001-2006)

Visuals: On a black background, colorful light blinks appear, which are then revealed to be reflected off a small, blue glass sphere. The sphere zooms out, then becomes cut in half, while forming a distorted triangle to the left; the final result resembles an abstract eye. The words "FIRST LOOK" with "M E D I A" in spaced-out letters below, in the same color as the eye, appear below with a blur effect. The final logo's texture flows.

Variants: There is a variant in which "P I C T U R E S" or "I N T E R N A T I O N A L" (for international distribution prints starting in 2003; formerly Overseas Filmgroup) appears in place of "MEDIA". This version has the byline "A DIVISION OF FIRST LOOK MEDIA" below.

Technique: Live-action and CGI.

Audio: Soft chime bell sounds with whooshes, or none.

Availability: It can be seen on films such as Doctor Sleep (2002), Epicenter, Elling, Skins and Lawless Heart. This also plasters or (not often) precedes the Overseas Filmgroup logo on recent domestic prints of its films.

First Look Studios

Logo (2006-2010)

Visuals: There is an image of a sea at sunrise with clouds moving. Then, the area around the screen darkens, and a bright flash occurs as it goes into an image of a green eye. The lens flare moves off to the right as "F I R S T L O O K S T U D I O S" fades in above and below, respectively.

Variants:

An early variant had the logo zoom out onto a black background once the text fades in.

There is a variant in which "P I C T U R E S" appears in place of "S T U D I O S". This is usually seen on trailers.

A variant with "I N T E R N A T I O N A L" exists.

Technique: Live-action and CGI.

Audio: A short piano tune that ends in a five-note orchestral fanfare.

Audio Variant: On Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film For Theaters, the opening theme of the movie is heard.

Availability: It can be seen on films produced/distributed by them and DVD and Blu-Ray releases from the era. The "Pictures" variant appeared on Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters. Starting in 2008, all films, home media, and international releases began using the "Studios" variant of the logo.