The final goodbyes were said to a D-Day hero who was honoured with a full military funeral.

Hundreds of family, friends and service personnel packed into the church at Arborfield Garrison on Friday to pay their respects to Sgt Wally Harris, who died on Thursday, June 12, aged 93.

The veteran from Crown Wood lost his battle with stomach cancer on June 12, the day he was due to return to Normandy to commemorate the battle’s 70th anniversary.

Colonel Dan Scott, Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME), read the military tribute to Wally, speaking of his service and bravery during the Second World War.

He was given full military honours including a three volley salute outside REME Corps and Garrison Church of St Eligius after the service.

Wally’s son George Harris, 63, said: “I spoke to my father before he died and told him the army were praying for him and were planning to give him a military funeral if he passed away, and he was incredibly proud of that.

“Because my father was essentially one of the founding members of REME, and to honour his incredible act of bravery in 1944, he was given the full military honours, which is unusual for someone who isn’t in active service.

“Over the last two weeks since he passed away, I have been working closely with the funeral directors and the army to make sure we gave him a good send off.

“It was a unique service for a truly unique individual, and we felt very proud, as I’m sure he would too.”

Wally joined the Territorial Army (TA) aged 18 on April 14, 1939 and served with the REME as a mechanic.

He was among 156,000 troops sent to the Battle on Normandy on June 6, 1944, and was later awarded the Military Medal for his heroism after he went back into the sea to salvage equipment from ‘drowned’ vehicles.

He saved countless lives when he used a salvaged machine gun to attacked German gunners preparing an ambush in the aftermath.

He was also awarded Freedom of the City of London and his story inspired filmmakers to produce independent movie Above and Beyond: The Craftsman.

He spent 14 and a half years serving his country before moving to Bracknell in 1959 with his wife, Dolly, and went on to have seven sons.

REME Captain Lee Loveridge said: “It has been a brilliant turn-out today, which we are really pleased about.

“I have been liaising with the family to make sure that Sgt Harris’ funeral was given the full honours that he deserves, and I think we have achieved that today.”

Wally, who died at Thames Hospice in Windsor, leaves behind his wife and five sons.

Read More: