NEW YORK (NBA) - When push comes to shove, Carlos Delfino is ready to mix it up.

The Argentina international handed out a warning of what opponents at this summer's FIBA World Championship can expect as he helped the Detroit Pistons to a 97-90 win over the Dallas Mavericks. On a night when Spain's Pau Gasol scored a career-high 44 points with the Memphis Grizzlies and still lost, Pistons reserve Delfino made the intangible differences for his team to claim another win.

Delfino's contribution in this clash of the titans does not show up in the boxscore, however.

Dallas led 88-86 with 4:34 remaining when Delfino, a gold medal winner at the Olympics with Argentina, barged into Jerry Stackhouse. The pair tumbled to the floor with Stackhouse appearing to wrap his arm around Delfino's neck as they fell. They grappled as they got to their feet before quickly being separated.

Delfino walked away, chuckling to himself despite being charged with an offensive foul. Stackhouse, a key part of the Mavericks attack, never recovered. Having scored 25 points up to that point, his only contribution in the remaining minutes were three turnovers which gave the initiative back to Detroit.

When it came to making the game-winning shots, it wasn't Delfino but Team USA's Chauncey Billups who drove the Pistons to victory. He poured in eight of his 31 points in the final three minutes to live up to his "Mr Big Shot" nickname. He also added 11 assists on the night, while Rasheed Wallace had 21 points and 10 rebounds. Delfino, for the record, had two points.

Germany international Dirk Nowitzki matched Stackhouse's 25 points for the Mavericks, adding 11 rebounds. Senegal's DeSagana Diop pulled down nine rebounds.

Gasol effort wasted

The Memphis Grizzlies Gasol's effort a franchise-record 44 points, as they slipped to a 98-97 loss at home to the Seattle SuperSonics. All-Star Ray Allen scored 20 points - including the last five of the game - to win it for Seattle after they almost let slip a double-digit half-time lead.

Mike Miller gave the Grizzlies a 97-93 lead with 1:07 left, but Allen responded with a three-pointer that beat the shot clock 26 seconds later. The Sonics then forced a shot clock violation before Allen drove down the left side to hit the winning shot, which went off the glass and rattled around before dropping in with 0.3 seconds remaining.

Gasol's effort came from 17 of 28 shooting and 10 of 12 free throws. He added nine rebounds. For Seattle, French rookie Johan Petro scored 15 points.

Turkey's Turkoglu terrific

Hedo Turkoglu of Turkey scored 15 points and made a pair of clutch jumpers in the final two minutes as the Orlando Magic rallied for a 97-93 win over the Chicago Bulls. Chicago led for virtually all of the first three quarters and held an 84-73 advantage when Argentinian Andres Nocioni scored with 11:07 to play. Nocioni had a career-high 26 points and 10 rebounds in the defeat.

The Bulls did not score again from the field until the final minute as the Magic put together a 17-2 run, fuelled by six points from Serbia & Montenegro's Darko Milicic. Turkoglu's jumper with 1:53 left put Orlando ahead 87-86 and after Ben Gordon finally ended Chicago's drought, it was Turkoglu again who put them back in front for good. Milicic collected a total of 12 points, eight rebounds and four blocks, while Puerto Rico's Carlos Arroyo had 13 for the Magic.

Parker-less Spurs trip up Clippers

The San Antonio Spurs did not miss leading scorer Tony Parker in a 98-87 win over the Los Angeles Clippers. The France international was out with a bruised right shin, but the Spurs responded as Tim Duncan scored 20 points and grabbed 13 rebounds and Michael Finley added 20 points. Defensive stopper Bruce Bowen of Team USA added 16 while Argentina's Manu Ginobili had eight. Team USA big man Elton Brand led the Clippers with 20 points and 10 rebounds.

Three-balling Bucks

The Milwaukee Bucks made a franchise-record 18 three-pointers en route to a 132-110 win over the Phoenix Suns. Eleven of those shots from beyond the arc came in a sizzling 46-point third quarter.

Team USA's Michael Redd led the Bucks with 28 points while Charlie Bell recorded his first career triple-double with 19 points, 13 assists and 10 rebounds. Croatian Toni Kukoc and Dutchman Dan Gadzuric contributed 17 points apiece for Milwaukee.

Reigning MVP Steve Nash made nine of 10 shots for Phoenix as he scored 23 points, leading seven Suns in double figures. Brazilian international Leandro Barbosa was among them with 10 points.

Wizards call on Butler

Team USA's Gilbert Arenas was missing, but the Washington Wizards had enough to beat the Sacramento Kings 97-84. Caron Butler led the team with 23 points and nine rebounds, while Antonio Daniels and Antawn Jamison each had 17 points.

Jamison was also named in the 23-strong US team and could travel to the FIBA World Championship this summer.

Brave Wallace leads Charlotte

Gerald Wallace set a career and franchise record as he scored 41 points in the Charlotte Bobcats 125-117 win over the Atlanta Hawks. Rookie Raymond Felton added 28 and 10 assists for the Bobcats.

Joe Johnson had 35 points for the Hawks.

By PA Sport