Coming of Age stories has always been one of my favorite genres in books, movies and dramas. This year a number of Asian dramas that falls under this genre were aired. While all of them were an enjoyable watch and deserve applause, the show that really made me obsessed and invested was ‘A Little Thing Called First Love.”

This drama is a Chinese adaptation of the 2010 Thai Romantic Film, ‘Crazy Little Thing Called Love.” If you are a fan of the original movie like me, you will enjoy this Chinese drama tremendously. I love the way they scattered the scenes from the movie throughout the series. It was fun waiting for those elements to appear. I particularly love the way they interpreted the ‘scrapbook’ scene.

A Little Thing Called First Love tells the story of an ordinary girl who fell crazily in love with the most popular guy in school. Sounds cliché? Yes it is. But the story line and the screenplay were written so well that it felt as if there was magic in every scene. I cannot even blink because I was so focused in watching every little detail. It made me wonder, why do I love this drama so much? Why do I end up still awake at five in the morning for days because I cannot stop watching? Why do I want to watch it all over again even though it has thirty six episodes? Here are the reasons why I fell for A Little Thing Called First Love:

1: LOVABLE AND RELATABLE CHARACTERS PLUS GRADUAL AND SATISFYING CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT.

The story started when Xiao Miao Miao and her family moved to a new town. She is a shy and artistic student who only had one friend from her previous school. She has dark skin, curly hair, wears eyeglasses and has crooked teeth. She always looks on the ground. One day as she was giving away fliers for her mother’s restaurant, she saw Liang You Nian playing basketball. She fell in love. Later on she learned that he was a senior on her new school.

Liang You Nian is handsome, confident, smart and popular. He is also very kind, a good son and a loyal friend. He is mature but he also has his boyish moments, making him more human and normal instead of fictional perfect. His first personal encounter with Miao Miao (the first he was aware of) was too ordinary that it gave a natural flow for the rest of their encounters and scenes together. The realness of each scene only made the show so interesting to watch. Seeing the way they gradually grew close to each other and how Miao Miao treasures each moment with You Nian gave me a sense of blissful happiness.

Miao Miao, experiencing the wonder of first love, began to change slowly. She felt like she has to be a better person to deserve even the slight attention of You Nian. She began to study hard and aimed to achieve her dream of becoming a fashion designer. Because of You Nian her grades became above average and she got accepted in the University of her choice. Her physical transformation was also subtle and each change became the sign of time passing by until finally she was already a college student.

Coincidentally, Liang You Nian was also a student in the University where Miao Miao became a freshman. In college they became closer because they had more time to be together than in high school. Their friends noticed how Miao Miao is no longer as shy as she was before. She already started getting out of her comfort zone, joining clubs, studying hard and learning fashion. She also gained confidence to participate in other school activities, making her the center of attention. You Nian on the other hand, was even more popular in college but his interest was only in Miao Miao and his dream of becoming an architect.

2: FAMILY, FRIENDSHIP, LOVE AND FULFILLING DREAMS.

In coming of age stories, these factors are a must have. In A Little Thing Called First Love, the interesting aspect of the story is not only the main characters but the people surrounding them. I loved watching their interactions with their families. You Nian’s was the complicated one. His scenes with his father as well as his memories about her mother were touching and memorable. These scenes really showed the promise of Lai Guanlin’s acting.

Miao Miao and her family were also heartwarming to watch. I love how theirs was portrayed like any normal family, with siblings fight, nagging mother and a father out to work. At the second half of the series, her moments with her mother made me cry and also made me emotional. It was because those scenes showed how Miao Miao really grew up from a timid girl to a young woman who knows what she wants to do with her life and has the guts to make it happen.

I also find it interesting how there were other love lines in this drama aside from the main characters. Every love line has its own moments throughout the story. Most of the time, there were annoying and frustrating scenes. But I can forgive because they were young and really bound to make mistakes because of uncontrolled emotions and inability to express their selves properly. Fortunately, each character grew up too.

This drama might be a light romantic series centered on first love, but it was also about setting your goals and fulfilling your dreams. The drama showed that if you really want something, you can achieve it if you work hard for it.

3: UNFORGETTABLE LINES AND ‘KILIG’ INDUCING SCENES

“From the first time I met her, Xiao Miao Miao never changed. She has always been kind.”

This line from Liang You Nian was proof that from the first time he met the timid, awkward Miao Miao, what he saw was not her imperfections but her best qualities. He has always been kind and attentive to her. When they were in college his best friend pointed out that since high school You Nian gave Miao Miao a special treatment. But You Nian, naturally slow when it comes to realizing his feelings said that he treats her as a sister.

“Thank you for making me better and better.”

When Miao Miao said this to You Nian, I literally cried. She fell in love and it has been unrequited for years but instead of being sad she made her feelings a fuel to change herself. Because of her feelings for You Nian, she became the version of herself that she can be proud of. It shows that love can bring positive changes in a person. That it can be an inspiration and not distraction. That love can make you brave.

“Nine thirty in the evening. The time I realized I am in love with Xiao Miao Miao.”

This moment gave me all the feels I had to repeat the scene again and again. This line was so crucial for the next scenes to come. Everything that happened after You Nian’s realization is all kilig moments. It will make you wish you can go back in time. Just to become their age again. Just to experience that first love again.

“Love is about growing up and bearing commitment to each other.”

A Little Thing Called First Love was a story about love, heartache and friendship. It is about finding yourself and growing up. It is about making childish mistakes and learning from these experiences. It is about relationships with people; classmates, friends, families and your love one. This drama showed that first love is actually not a little thing. It is a huge thing that has a big impact in a person’s life. Whether you end up with the first person you ever loved or you had other relationships after that, first love will always be special. After all, you can only experience it once in a lifetime.