See also: A Little Thing Called First Love

This page uses content from an article at Wikipedia. The list of authors can be seen in the page history. As with Drama Wiki, the text of Wikipedia is available under the GNU Free Documentation License.

Crazy Little Thing Called Love (สิ่งเล็กเล็ก ที่เรียกว่า...รัก, Sing lek lek thi riak wa... rak; lit. A Little Thing Called Love), also known as First Love, is a 2010 Thai romantic comedy film starring Mario Maurer and Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul. The movie was distributed by Sahamongkol Film International Co. Ltd. and Workpoint Entertainment. The story depicts love in the eye of young people who first experience it and how it affects their lives and their inspirations.

Synopsis[]

Nam is an ordinary, unattractive 14-year-old girl secretly in love with the most popular boy in school named Shone. He's hot, perfect, and generous, and that's what makes girls go crazy about him. Nam does everything she can in hopes that Shone will look her way, but can she build up the courage to tell him how she feels?[1]

Plot[]

Nam is a bespectacled, swarthy girl who has a crush on P'Shone (also known as Shone), a popular student in her high school, but she feels that he is too handsome for her. Helped by her three friends, Nam follows the advice of the guidebook Nine Recipes of Love, which supposedly has the magical power to win affection from the boy of choice. The nine steps require Nam to beautify herself by switching her glasses with contacts, wearing teeth braces and whitening her skin, as well as secretly leaving a chocolate cake inside Shone's motorbike, though all of them seems futile in attracting his attention. Nam also has an additional pursuit of going to the United States, where her father works; he promises to Nam and her sister a plane ticket for whoever gets the top grade in school.

After getting into a fight with the influential Faye, Nam and her friends are unable to enter the Thai dance club and forced to register in the unpopular English drama club for the school fair. Nam is selected to play Snow White in the titular play, while Shone works as a stage painter. Thanks to the drama, Nam instantly becomes a hot issue within the school, and her popularity further explodes when she is chosen as the drum major of the school parade.

During the second year, Shone's childhood friend, Top, transfers to the school. He falls in love at first sight with Nam and declares his love for her. The shocked Nam does not respond for fear of hurting him, so Top thinks that she accepts the confession. Nam is uncomfortable with the situation, especially when Top kisses her suddenly when the two are attending a friend's birthday party, during which Top shares the story about a promise he made with Shone: that they would never like the same girl. Meanwhile, Nam's increasingly close relationship with Top, Shone, and their associates has distanced her from her three old friends; the four barely talk with each other anymore as they enter their third year.

Unable to repress her emotions, Nam breaks up with Top shortly before the finals, in which she ranks first, making her able to settle in the United States. She then has a tearful reconciliation with her old friends, who help her to do the "10th recipe" of the love guidebook: direct confession. However, to her dismay, Shone reveals that he is dating Pin, a mutual friend. That night, Shone comes home to find out that he is accepted into a trainee program in a professional soccer team, and has to leave for the camp the following morning. He goes into his room and takes out a diary containing all of Nam's photos; Shone has always loved Nam, even before her transformation, but never manages to gain the courage to confess. He leaves the diary in front of Nam's house; at the same time, Nam is shown mourning his rejection in her bedroom.

Nine years later, Nam and Shone have become a successful fashion designer and photographer, respectively. Nam returns to Thailand to attend a variety show. She gets a surprise visit by Shone, who reveals that he has been waiting for her after all those years.

Cast[]

Soundtrack[]

Main Article: Crazy Little Thing Called Love OST

Production[]

Filming began in July 2009 and concluded in June 2010.

Releases[]

The movie premiered on the same day as the Queen of Thailand's birthday and Mother's Day. On its opening weekend, from August 12 to August 15, 2010, it was the third highest-grossing movie behind the slapstick monastic comedy Luangphee Teng 3 and Toy Story 3. It eventually rose to second place the following weekend.

First Love grossed a total of roughly $2.6 million (70+ million baht), which is higher than initially expected.

In the Philippines, the movie was aired on ABS-CBN on June 5, 2011. It was dubbed in Tagalog for the broadcast. The movie re-aired on June 20 and October 28, 2011, as well as on ABS-CBN's movie cable network during Thanksgiving season at 20:00 PHT as per the viewer's request. It was also re-broadcast on March 30, 2012 and June 9, 2012 under the free movie block Kapamilya Blockbusters. The broadcast stations subsidiary network and Cinema One later also aired the movie in full-length and completely uncut.

The movie was released in Shanghai for the 2011 Shanghai International Film Festivals.

Reception[]

The film received generally positive reviews from critics and audiences, despite the average budget. In Thailand, the film placed in 3rd place from its weekend gross in almost a hundred cinemas in Thailand, and then up to 2nd place on the next weekend behind Kuan Mun Ho. The other two movies (including Toy Story 3) simultaneously released with First Love dropped to 3rd and 4th respectively. The film managed to maintain its position in 3rd place the following weekends and stayed inside the top 5 for six consecutive weeks. The film was shown in cinemas for nearly ten weeks (until October 2010), making it one of the longest-running movies in the history of Thai cinema. The film grossed a total of $2,659,443, becoming the second highest-grossing locally produced film in Thailand.

By early 2011, copies of the film were uploaded on the Internet, with several other countries applying for screening rights.

In the Philippines, the movie made an impact to viewers after it was dubbed in Filipino and shown on free TV on June 5, 2011 on ABS-CBN. It dominated the daytime viewership ratings, Just 2 weeks after it was first shown on free TV, on June 20, the film repeated in an afternoon slot. The movie block time slot got the highest rating compared to other programs.

Mario Maurer and Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul, the main stars of the movie, arrived in the Philippines together on August 3, 2013 for their fan conferences on the following day for their endorsement of a local clothing brand.

Due to the film's success in the Philippines, Star Cinema produced and released the Filipino romantic comedy film Suddenly It's Magic which starred Erich Gonzales, Mario Maurer, and Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul.

Accolades[]

Year Award Category Nominated work Result 2010 Top Awards Best Movie of the Year First Love Won Best Film Director Puttipong Pormsaka Na-Sakonnakorn & Wasin Pokpong Nominated Favorite Film Actor Mario Maurer Won Favorite Film Rising Star Female Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul Best Supporting Actress Sudarat Budtporm 8th Starpics Thai Film Awards Best Actress 19th Bangkok Critics Assembly Awards Best Supporting Actress Best-Looking Actor Mario Maurer Nominated Star Entertainment Awards Best Actress Sudarat Budtporm Won Favorite Actor Mario Maurer Nominated 2011 8th Kom Chad Luek Awards Actress Excellent (Movie) Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul 3rd Okinawa International Movie Festival Laugh Category Uminchu Prize Grand Prix First Love Won Thailand Film Festival Awards Film of the Year Actress in a Leading Role Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul Music Field from the Motion Picture of the Year First Love Nominated 20th Supanahongsa Awards Best Actress Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul Outstanding Music Composition Award Ground Music Music Excellence Award First Love MThai Top Talk Awards Top Talk-About Movie Won Star Couple for 2011 Mario Maurer and Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul 21st Thailand National Film Association Awards Best Actress Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul Nominated Best Original Song First Love 13th Udine Far East Film Festival Technicolor Asia Award Won Siam Dara Star Awards Best Film Nominated Best Director Puttipong Pormsaka Na-Sakonnakorn & Wasin Pokpong Outstanding Film Actress Baifern Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul Rising Star Award for Best Woman Actress Seventeen Choice Awards Hottest Man Mario Maurer

Sequel[]

In 2012, it has been announced that First Love will have its sequel and will be produced by the same team. However, there are no further announcements yet regarding the said sequel.

Remake and Adaptation[]

In 2019, the movie was adapted into a Chinese web series titled A Little Thing Called First Love starring Lai Kuan Lin. It was broadcast on Hunan TV.

Trivia[]

This movie was inspired by a true story.[2]

Gallery[]