Alternate Title/s: First Love; A Thing Called Love

Director: Puttipong Pormsaka Na-Sakonnakorn and Wasin Pokpong

Writer: Puttipong Pormsaka Na-Sakonnakorn and Wasin Pokpong

Producer: Somsak Tejcharattanaprasert and Panya Nirankol

Cinematographer: Reungwit Ramasudh

Release Date: August 12, 2010 (Thailand)

Runtime: 118 min.

Starring: Mario Maurer, Pimchanok Lerwisetpibol aka Fern, Sudarat Budtporm

Overview:

The ordinary 14 years old girl name Nam. she’s unattractive or simple call… the ugly! But she had secretly in love with older guy in grade 10 name Chon, a most popular student in high-school. He’s hot, perfect and generous. That’s make girls in school going crazy about him, including Nam too. But she doesn’t give up easily. She tried do everything to made her pretty good and outstanding in school. Because she hopes him turned around at her just once more time.

Source: asianmediawiki

I Say:

Crazy Little Thing Called Love aka First Love is the first Thai movie that I have seen. I was surprised by its popularity not only in Thailand but also here in the Philippines. CLTCL is also appreciated in other parts of Asia and even in the US. Thai movies are similar to our very own, meaning they are as romantic and exaggerated. And it has a little bit of everything. It makes you laugh, cry and then laugh again. Watching CLTCL’S trailer easily touched my heart. It says: It’s the true story of everyone. It’s a story we all can relate to. We’ve all been through the heartbreak of being in love for the first time and I think we’ve all experienced it when we’re young. But not all of us end up being with our first love. But even if that’s the case, we can never ever forget how it made us feel.

This movie highlighted the complications of first love. On the very positive side, Nam was inspired by Shone and became a better person. She changed herself but in a good way and made it to the top. As for Shone, his character clearly showed the weakness of men when it comes to being honest with their feelings and being one’s true friend. To top that he waited nine years for something he could’ve affirmed for a much deserved happy ending. Tsk tsk tsk.

Thanks to Nam’s ever supportive girlfriends placing all their effort into this Ugly duckling. Again this brings about another similarity among Asians… is light skin really an implication of beauty? It seems we are always at our best effort to have light skin and then be called beautiful. Nam being an Asian teenager does not make her an exemption. I like the way they masked Fern’s true appearance.And as the movie progressed, they slowly got rid of the dark skin and those thick glasses and eyebrows.

Sudarat Budtporm, who played as Teacher Inn reminded me of one of our local artists, Pokwang. She’s very funny and very suitable as the support act.