Who can resist a good romance film? Whether it’s a quirky romantic-comedy or a heavy romantic drama, you can’t deny that stories centered on love make for a good watch, best enjoyed with a huge tub of popcorn and some drinks.

Over the years, Thailand has produced romantic films that have gained popularity domestically and internationally. These films often blend drama, comedy, and even fantasy into one engaging film, capturing the hearts of audiences with their relatable themes and charming characters.

If you’re looking for movies to binge-watch on your next free day, we’ve listed eight must-see Thai romantic films that are guaranteed to bring on the feels. Get ready to fall in love and more when you watch these iconic flicks.

First Love (Crazy Little Thing Called Love), 2010

Starring Mario Maurer and Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul (Baifern), "First Love" captured the hearts of many with its heartwarming storyline about first love. Baifern plays the role of Nam, a shy high school girl who has a crush on the school heartthrob, Shone, played by Maurer.

The film focuses on Nam’s journey through high school – from her transformation into a beautiful young lady to her bond with her friends and family. While it seems Nam’s crush was unrequited, the film reveals its romantic twists toward the end, wherein Nam and Shone meet again as adults. Will they end up together? Watch the film to find out.

Love of Siam, 2007

A critically acclaimed multi-layered romantic drama film, “Love of Siam” is considered one of the most iconic Thai films of all time, having dominated the awards season in 2007. Aside from highlighting teenage romance and themes of family and friendship, the movie also focuses on the love between two teenage boys, Tong and Mew, expertly portrayed by Mario Maurer and Witwisit Hiranyawongkul, respectively.

“Love of Siam” is also recognized for tackling identity and acceptance, as it delves into the challenges young people face in navigating their relationships and fulfilling family expectations.

My Girl (Fan Chan), 2003

You can't say no to coming-of-age romantic films, and “My Girl” is one movie you can't miss. Starring Charlie Trairat as Jeab and Focus Jirakul as Noi-Naa, 'My Girl' is full of nostalgia, with the story told in flashbacks. When Jeab learns that his childhood best friend Noi-Naa is getting married, he travels back to their hometown, where he reminisces about their fond childhood memories.

After many years, the two reunite for Noi-Naa’s wedding, leading both to confront their feelings and whether they missed their chance to be together. Filled with humor and touching moments, “My Girl” remains one of the most popular Thai films of all time.

Bangkok Traffic Love Story, 2009

Commuting and love may seem like an unlikely mix, but in “Bangkok Traffic Love Story,” Mei Li (Cris Horwang) finds love on the BTS Skytrain when she meets Loong (Theeradej Wongpuapan). The film centers on Mei Li, who is desperate to find true love, being the last among her friends to marry, and her relationship with Loong, an engineer on the BTS Skytrain.

Exploring themes of love and self-discovery, the movie portrays how a friendship develops between Mei Li and Loong, which then blossoms into romance. As much as you’d want the two to have a smooth-sailing relationship, the film depicts the ups and downs of relationships in a bustling city like Bangkok, resonating with the audience.

The Teacher’s Diary, 2014

Can you fall in love with someone after reading his or her diary? In “The Teacher’s Diary,” Sukrit Wisetkaew plays the role of Song, a new teacher at a remote school. There, he discovers the diary owned by former teacher Ann (Chermarn Boonyasak), where she writes about her experiences and challenges.

As Song navigates his new role and relationships with the students and the community, he finds inspiration and strength in Ann’s stories and words. As he reads her diary, Song begins to develop feelings for Ann. “The Teacher’s Diary” is not your ordinary love story; it shines a spotlight on the importance of education and how individuals can make a difference in the lives of others.

Hello Stranger, 2010

A romantic-comedy film set in South Korea, “Hello Stranger” features a young man and woman who meet while on vacation in the country. They decide to travel around together, without revealing their names to each other. Starring Chantavit Dhanasevi as Dang and Nuengthida Sophon as May, “Hello Stranger” highlights various locations featured in different Korean dramas, such as N Seoul Tower, Dongdaemun, Myeongdong, and Seoraksan National Park, among others.

Suffice it to say, watching the film feels like going on a trip around South Korea, too, so watch for the feels and sights.

Best of Times, 2009

A love story featuring a dog? Count us in! “Best of Times” tells the story of Keng (Arak Amornsupasiri), a young veterinarian who reconnects with his old crush and his friend’s ex-wife, Fai (Yarinda Bunnag), when she brings an injured stray dog to the clinic for treatment. After getting arrested for driving under the influence, Keng has to give computer lessons to seniors as part of his community service sentence. There, he meets Jamras and Somphit, who have their own love story. Will the two couples have their happy endings?

Heartwarming and full of insight, “Best of Times” shows that love knows no age and it comes even when you least expect it.

February, 2003

Jeab Sopidnapa (Kaewta) and Chakrit Yamnam (Jeeradech) star in “February,” a romance-drama film set in New York City. In the film, Kaewta, who has a terminal illness, decides to go to New York City where she plans to spend her remaining days. Unfortunately, she develops amnesia after a car accident. She then meets a man who takes care of her. But is he being truthful? You need to watch the movie to find out.