Crazy Little Thing Called Love or สิ่งเล็กๆที่เรียกว่ารัก (Sing Lek Lek Tee Riak Wa Rak) is a 2010 Thai romantic comedy film and also a 2011 Asian sleeper hit film starring Mario Maurer and Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul (or Baifern). The story depicts love in the eye of young people who first experience it and how it affects their lives and their inspirations. [credit: wikipedia]

This movie is one of the most famous Thai movies among (Thai movie) oversea fans I think. Of course, Mario Maurer from “Love of Siam” sure help to attract people to watch it but what makes “Crazy Little Thing Called Love” becomes unbelievably HIT is the plot that base on true story of more than 90% of young girls. As I am one of million people who have that kinda puppy love experiences, watching this movie reminds the high school days and I am sure many of you love this movie because of this reason too.

If you are a big fan of Crazy Little Thing Called Love or Mario or Baifern. You might want to know where this movie taking place. This movie used the peaceful suburban city, Petchaburi, as the main location. I personally think this is the main reason to make this movie looks “cute” too.

Museum of Siam

The only one interesting place in Bangkok in this movie kekeke ;b – This is the place at the beginning of the movie, where Shone’s photo exhibition was shown. Museum of Siam is locate in Bangkok. It is like the learning centre of Thailand. They use new methods of a display with modern media in order to make visitors understanding historical stories of the Thai nation as well as Thai people in their history, nation, culture, and localities.

I think the main location in this movie is in Petchaburi province (and Ratchaburi too, actually) but what they shot in Ratchabusi are private place such as school scene so maybe it’s not convenience for tourists to visit schools (and vice versa) right? therefore, just Petchburi is enough i think ^^

Petchaburi province is well known for its splendid historical park, ancient temples, wonderful beaches and caves, as well as a great variety of local foods and fresh seafood. Petchaburi also has a popular resort town, Cha-am, which is the premier beach resort in the province. (cr. TAT)

Where to go in Petchaburi if you are “Crazy Little Thing Called Love” fans?

Petchburi train station

Why don’t you try going to Petchburi by train? so that you can see the train station that Nam came to picked up her guest. Here’s State Railway of Thailand website http://www.railway.co.th/home/Default.asp?lenguage=Eng ;b just in case you are interested.

Rabieng Rim Nam Restaurant & Guesthouse

This is the location of Nam (main actress)’s house. It’s also restaurant and guesthouse in reality. Rabieng Rim Nam is famous among backpackers from its cheap price, good location, warm atmosphere, old style house and etc.

Sapan Dam (Black bridge)

Sapan Dam or Black Bridge is the railway bride across Petchburi river. Why here? >////< This is where P’Shone and Nam met each other for the first time. Nam walked under the bridge and P’Shone sudden jumped to be in front of her from no where and gave her…mangoes…kinda “cute” first met right?

Kaeng Krachan National Park

This is the highlight! the most romantic scene (for me) happened here kekeke. Kaeng Krachan National Park is the most extensive national park of Thailand, occupying a largely unexplored area of 2,915 square kilometers (1.7 million rai of land). It was declared a national park on 12 June 1981. The park is located 53.5 kilometers from the city and is 3 kilometers beyond Khuean Kaeng Krachan (Kaeng Krachan Dam). (cr. TAT)

Do you remember the bridge that Shone told Num about the squid story? It’s here too =]

“Once upon a time, there were 2 squids. They had travelled till they met each other. Then they fell in love. They become a couple finally, They got married. On the day of marriage, Squid Priest told them to hold hands. So, they held each other hands. Held hands, held hands, held, hands, held hands, held hands, held hands, held hands, held hands, held hands”

As I’ve mentioned before all school and Shone’s house’s scenes were shot in Ratchburi province so, if you have a chance…it’s good to visit there too. Here’s information about Ratchburi for you to get some idea.

The Ratchaburi provincial area abounds in natural attractions and historical sites. Ratchaburi features outstanding natural beauty and a number of opportunities to learn about Thai culture. Ratchaburi’s premier attraction is the Damnoen Saduak Floating Market, a ‘must-see’ destination visited by a large percentage of tourists who visit Bangkok. (cr. TAT)

Daruna Ratchaburi school is where school scene were filmed.

Hope this useful for this movie/ Mario/Baifern fans. And as I heard, they are planing for “Crazy Little Called Love 2” and I really can’t wait for that!! wanna see Nam and P’Shone on screen soonest!

Maybe taken out with credit

Kiwi_Kung =]