Astoria, Oregon, is a hidden gem on the Pacific Northwest coast that captivates visitors with its rich history, stunning natural beauty, and vibrant cultural scene. It’s hard not to fall in love with this magical town, especially after you spend some time exploring all the nooks and crannies that make it so special. But not only does this coastal town offer a picturesque stop between the Columbia River and lush forests, but there is also quite a bit of historical significance worth exploring. For instance, did you know this small coastal town boasts the title of the oldest American settlement west of the Rockies? And that’s just the tip of the iceberg regarding things to do in Astoria, Oregon.

Astoria offers breathtaking scenery and outdoor recreational opportunities such as hiking, kayaking, and beachcombing. The town’s thriving arts and culture scene is evident in its numerous galleries, theaters, and festivals, while the delightful downtown Astoria area entices with unique shops, cozy cafes, and delicious culinary offerings. Astoria, Oregon, truly has it all, making it a fantastic Small Town Getaway for those seeking a blend of history, nature, arts, and small-town charm.

Do you love visiting and learning all about America’s small towns? Take our interactive quiz to discover which Small Town Getaway you should take this year.

Is Astoria Worth Visiting?

Without question – yes, Astoria, Oregon, is absolutely worth visiting.

Advertisement

Advertisement

How To Get To Astoria

Getting to Astoria, Oregon is relatively straightforward. Here are a few common ways to reach this charming coastal town:

By Air: The nearest major airport is Portland International Airport (PDX), located about 97 miles southeast of Astoria. From the airport, you can rent a car and drive to Astoria following Highway 30, or you may consider taking a shuttle or public transportation to the city and then renting a car locally for exploring the area.

Getting Around Astoria

Similar to many other small towns in Oregon, Astoria is a very walkable place, especially the downtown area.

Best Time To Visit Astoria

Advertisement

But if you want to build your visit around a few covered festivals, we have some to keep in mind:

Where To Stay In Astoria

Advertisement

Day One: Hiking, History, and Hops!

Advertisement

Day Two: Movies, Maritime, & Meat

Next time you’re seeking an idyllic small-town retreat in Oregon, make sure to consider the spectacular town of Astoria. Have you had the pleasure of visiting this captivating town before? Which Astoria attractions were your absolute favorite? Sound off in the comments section! We’d love to hear if you have your own personal recommendations about things to do that our readers should know.

Ready to keep learning about Astoria, Oregon? Check out this beautifully detailed documentary from Oregon Public Broadcasting about this delightful small town:

Thanks for letting us at OnlyInYourState be your ultimate Astoria travel guide. Once you’ve experienced the wonders of Astoria, you might find yourself yearning to discover other charming small towns in Oregon or in the United States. Explore a few other Small Town Getaways across America and start getting inspired.

Want more Oregon in your inbox?

Get the latest on things to see, do, and eat around Oregon!

spinner

Thank you! You will receive your first email soon.

An error occured.

Featured Addresses

Astoria, OR 97103, USA