GREENFIELD — Two months after the Franklin County Criminal Justice Center opened its doors to the community, local officials marveled over the circumstances that led the building to open in what they remarked was a most appropriate location: 43 Hope St.

Hope, they said, is what will be imparted on every individual who enters the courthouse, whether it be a 65-year-old woman seeking custody of a grandchild, a husband and wife going through a divorce, or someone struggling to overcome drug addiction.

“For everyone who walks into that building … it is a step toward turning a corner,” Senate President Stan Rosenberg said. “Whether it takes a few hours, a few days or a few years, there is hope that they can have a new life.”

“Every day, people walk into the building on what may be their worst day,” said William Mazanec III, first justice of Greenfield District Court. “But every day, we try to give them hope … That’s really, in the end, what this is all about to me.”

State and judiciary officials, lawmakers and individuals involved in seeing the new courthouse constructed gathered Friday afternoon for an opening ceremony for the Franklin County Criminal Justice Center — a project that Chief Justice Paula Carey of the Massachusetts Trial Court said has been “a long time coming.”

Planning began in the 1990s, she explained, after a 1992 “Reinventing Justice” study pointed to a user-friendly community justice center, where a unified court system and human services agencies could converge. Franklin County, she said, hoped to be designated as a pilot site.

“(The county is) the petri dish for much innovation,” Carey said.

“Today is a celebration, a celebration of many years and decades of commitment in this community,” said Lt. Gov. Karyn Polito, who voted on the courthouse as a legislator when one of the bond bills came through. “I think this is a celebration of three things: economic development, community development and human development.”

With the building complete, officials expressed their own hope for it to be a safe place where, in Rosenberg’s words, those involved can open their hearts to a different way of providing justice.

“This magnificent building is our community’s monument to liberty and freedom,” said John Stobierski of the Franklin County Bar Association.

“This isn’t just a building,” Rosenberg said. “It represents something much deeper and more fundamental.”

You can reach Shelby Ashline at: sashline@recorder.com

413-772-0261 ext. 257