Conservative MP and former minister James Brokenshire has died aged 53.

The Old Bexley and Sidcup MP passed away at Darent Valley Hospital in Dartford yesterday evening following a long battle with lung cancer.

The former Northern Ireland secretary had been seeking treatment after reporting the recurrence of a tumour on his right lung earlier this year.

He had been in hospital since Sunday after his condition rapidly deteriorated.

Brokenshire, who was originally from Essex, served as secretary of state for Northern Ireland and for communities and local government under Theresa May. He also held several junior government positions under Boris Johnson and David Cameron.

His family paid tribute to him in a statement in which they expressed their "deep sadness", adding: "James died peacefully at Darent Valley Hospital yesterday evening with family members by his bedside."

"James was not only a brilliant government minister as both Security and Inmigration Minister at the Home Office and Secretary of state at the Northern Ireland Office and Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, but a dedicated constituency MP.

"But most importantly, he was a loving father to his three children, a devoted husband to Cathy and a faithful friend to so many."

In August Mr Brokenshire regrettably announced his cancer had progressed and that he was starting a new line of treatment at Guy's and St Thomas' hospital in London.

The family also thanked NHS staff at the hospital for treating Mr Brokenshire "with such warmth, diligence and professionalism over the past three-and-a-half years".

Prime Minister Boris Johnson led tributes to Mr Brokenshire, who served as MP for Hornchurch in east London from 2005 to 2010 and then MP for Old Bexley and Sidcup from the 2010 election onwards.

He said he was “desperately sad” to hear of the Mr Brokenshire’s death.

“James was the nicest, kindest and most unassuming of politicians but also extraordinarily effective,” he said.

“He served with particular distinction in the Home Office and as Security Minister. If the government needed something done well and speedily - and sensibly explained - James was the man to do it.

“I worked with him for many years in London and I know how much he cared for the interests of his Bexley constituents."

Across Kent, fellow MPs also reacted to the tragic news and expressed their condolences.

Conservative colleague Kelly Tolhurst, the MP for Rochester and Strood tweeted: "Heartbreaking news today.

"James Brokenshire was a great friend and colleague, a fantastic minister in all the roles he undertook. A kind, thoughtful man who cared deeply about what he did.

"My thoughts & condolences are with Cathy and his family at this devastating time."

Tracey Crouch, the Chatham and Aylesford MP who recently announced she had been given the "all clear" after being diagnosed with breast cancer, said she was "utterly devastated" to hear of her colleague's passing.

She tweeted: "He was kind, thoughtful, an excellent MP and just generally a nice guy.

"My heartfelt love and prayers are with his family and friends."

Meanwhile, Damian Green, MP for Ashford, who also served with Mr Brokenshire as a minister under the Theresa May administration, said: "Desperately sad news about James Brokenshire. One of the absolutely best, decent, hard-working conscientious politicians and a loyal friend.

South Thanet MP Craig Mackinlay added: "An absolute tragedy. A truly decent man; so sorry to hear this dreadful and sudden news. Thinking of his family. #RIP dear James."

Helen Whately, MP for Faversham and Mid Kent also paid tribute to Mr Brokenshire who she said was "everything an MP should be - decent, hardworking and courageous", adding "He will be so much missed. My thoughts are with his family".

Across the political divide, Canterbury MP Rosie Duffield also expressed her condolences, tweeting "Extremely sad news. James was liked and respected across the House #RIP".

Opposition Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer tweeted: "James Brokenshire was a thoroughly decent man, dedicated and effective in all briefs he held.

"He fought his illness with dignity and bravery. I'm incredibly sad to learn of his death and send my condolences to his wife and children."

Mr Brokenshire stood back from his ministerial duties in the Home Office in July.

Previously, he served as housing secretary from April 2018 to July 2019, but was removed from that role as part of a reshuffle led by Boris Johnson.

He took up his most senior post as Northern Ireland Secretary under Mrs May and held the role until his resignation on health grounds in 2018.

His death will prompt a by-election in his Old Bexley and Sidcup constituency where he had a majority of 18,952.