The palace is usually associated with the Battle of Blenheim and as the birthplace of Winston Churchill.

The love affair between John Churchill, the 1st Duke of Marlborough, and his Duchess, the strong-willed Sarah, is fascinating, but not quite the image associated with St Valentine’s Day. Even the young Winston lacked the appearance of a Mills and Boon hero.

The ‘amour’ of the subject behind the latest exhibition at Blenheim Palace was, in her time, the most powerful woman in the world, Queen Victoria.

The young Victoria was nothing like the dour-faced older version. Maybe the melancholy of the older queen was a direct result of the genuine love she felt for Prince Albert.

However, it was generally considered that her mourning for the early loss of her husband, in 1861, went on a bit too long.

But, you may ask, what has the youthful romance of Albert and Victoria to do with Blenheim Palace?

On March 6, Momentum Pictures will release their film, The Young Victoria, across the UK. Academy Award winners Graham King and Martin Scorsese had it filmed on location in England and, in 2007, many scenes were filmed at Blenheim Palace.

To celebrate the reopening of the palace and the release of the film, Blenheim have mounted an exhibition in Sir John Vanbrugh’s Long Library.

It is an impressive setting for the costumes worn in the film, including those of Emily Blunt, who plays the young queen and local boy made good, Rupert Friend, who is in the role of the gallant prince.

The 56m-long library was also intended as a place to parade one’s finery on wet days, so is a fitting location for the costumes, props, photography and film stills taken when the crew were there on location.

Hannah Payne, Blenheim Palace’s marketing manager, described how its inspiring and timeless vistas ensure it is often used as a film location. Earlier shoots include Harry Potter and The Order of the Phoenix in 2006, and The Libertine, starring Johnny Depp, in 2004.

“During filming for The Young Victoria, the Great Court was taken over by rows of horse-guards awaiting the arrival of a horse-drawn carriage bringing Victoria and Albert to the palace.

“It was particularly exciting for our visitors who were watching the scene take place, not only to have huge stars on site, but also because it was fascinating to see people in full period costume fitting of the age — it was like stepping back in time. Early visitors to the exhibition will have the opportunity to preview clips from the forthcoming movie before it is released in cinemas!”

In Valentine mood, the grand table in the saloon will be decorated depicting a romantic dinner for two, not quite an intimate setting! It will, however, set the tone for the ‘Romantic Tour’ of the State Rooms revealing the love stories and the scandals of past inhabitants.

For me, the genuinely romantic part of Blenheim is the 2,100 acres of parkland and gardens designed by Capability Brown.

So, I hope the first five couples who ring 01993 811091 and quote ‘Sylvia Vetta’s feature in The Oxford Times’ will choose a fine day to make use of free entry to the palace, park and gardens on any single day from February 14 to March 31.

After Valentine’s Day comes the promise of spring and Blenheim Palace will host a family fun day for Easter in the form of ‘Butterflies and Bunnies’, an Easter egg challenge.

The palace will remain open until December 13. Opening hours are 10.30am to 5.30pm. Go to blenheimpalace.com or phone 08700 602080 for more details.