Background

Martin Scorsese was born on November 17, 1942, in Flushing, New York. He was the younger of Charles and Catherine Scorsese’s two sons, both of Sicilian ancestry. His mother was a seamstress, and his father was a clothes presser. Growing up with asthma prevented Scorsese from taking part in local activities, and he frequently found himself alone. While his healthy peers participated in sports and more social activities, he was entranced by movies, either watching them on television or going with his father to local theaters. Whatever thrills and excitement that Scorsese was unable to experience in reality, he found in films. He honed his knowledge of Hollywood films from the 1940s and 1950s at an early age. He enrolled in New York University’s Washington Square College, now known as the College of Arts and Science. He received the Best Student Picture award from The Producer’s Guild for his short film “It’s Not Just You, Murray!” in 1964, premiering in the New York Film Festival in 1966. He won prizes for other short films he produced while still a student.

When Scorsese first arrived in Hollywood in the early 1970s, he met producer and filmmaker Roger Corman, who requested him to helm a follow-up to his film “Bloody Mama.” Instead, Scorsese helmed Corman’s 1972 gangster movie “Boxcar Bertha,” which is comparable to Bonnie and Clyde. This film allowed him to familiarize himself with Hollywood, allowing him to improve his craft over the succeeding years. The next film in the filmmaker’s career was “Mean Streets,” a 1973 movie about a teenage Italian American attempting to survive in a challenging environment, cementing Scorsese’s style of machismo, violence, fast-paced action, and redemption. It was also in this decade when he started making documentaries such as “Italian American,” a 1974 study of his parents, and “American Boy,” a 1978 depiction of a friend fully entrenched in the 1960s drug culture. He took a detour from his regular film topics with “Alice Doesn’t Live Here Anymore,” a 1975 movie about a widowed mother trying to find herself in Arizona. After that, Scorsese released “Taxi Driver,” his debut blockbuster in 1976. The Cannes Film Festival gave “Taxi Driver” the International Grand Prize. In 1986, Scorsese released “The Color of Money,” starring Paul Newman to commercial success. It was one of his few high-budget films up to that point. His subsequent publication, 1988’s “The Last Temptation of Christ,” which explored a different understanding of Jesus’ acceptance of his mission on earth, angered certain religious organizations. With “Goodfellas,” a bloody account of the Mafia in New York City, Scorsese returned to more comfortable film territory. The film won Best Director Awards from the National Society of Film Critics, New York Film Critics, and Los Angeles Film Critics.

Over four decades, Scorsese has helmed 20 narrative features and documentaries. Since his first movie was released in 1968, he has also written a lot of screenplays. His experiences as a Catholic and Italian American informs his artistic expression. The director’s accomplishments can be ascribed to his great understanding of human nature and his capacity to use that insight to develop many of the most enduring characters in the movie business.

In 1965, Scorsese married Laraine Marie Brennan; the couple was married for six years. Their daughter, Catherine, was named after his mother. His second wife, Julia Cameron, was a writer, and Scorsese married her in 1976. They had a daughter, Domenica Cameron-Scorsese, who made an appearance in “The Age of Innocence.” Unfortunately, the union only lasted a year. Their bitter divorce inspired Cameron’s debut film, the dark comedy “God’s Will,” which also starred their daughter. Their daughter has continued to act, write, direct, and produce after that. Scorsese then wed actress Isabella Rossellini in 1979, a marriage that lasted four years. The fourth of Scorsese’s five marriages, with producer Barbara De Fina, ended in divorce in 1991. Following his fourth divorce, Scorsese had a relationship with actress Illeana Douglas from 1989 to 1997. Scorsese married Helen Schermerhorn Morris, his wife of more than 20 years, in 1999. Francesca, their daughter, is an actress and filmmaker who worked with her parents on “The Departed,” “Hugo,” and “The Aviator.”