Oscar-winning actor Martin Landau has died. He was 89-years-old.

The performer was best known for his turns in films including Ed Wood and North by Northwest as well as hit TV shows such as Mission: Impossible and Space: 1999 but also famously turned down the role of Spock in Star Trek. After a brief stay at UCLA Medical Center, he died of "unexpected complications."

A former cartoonist for the New York Daily News, Landau’s acting career started in the 1950s with appearances in a string of TV shows including Maverick but it was at the tail end of that decade, in 1959, when his supporting role in Alfred Hitchcock's North by Northwest received resounding critical acclaim. The film, widely considered to be one of the best thrillers of all time, was also a hit - made for an estimated $3.1 million, it took $22.21 million worldwide unadjusted for inflation.

Despite the rave reviews, he continued to work prolifically in TV for the next few years with roles in hit shows including Bonanza, The Untouchables, The Outer Limits and The Twilight Zone. In the early 1960s, Landau continues to snag the occasional big screen role being cast as Rufio in Cleopatra opposite Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton but it was three years later and his performance as Rollin Hand in the classic TV show Mission: Impossible that earned him several Emmy Award nominations and a Golden Globe Award. He quit after three seasons.

Although in the years that followed his career slumped somewhat, he did continue to turn out unforgettable performances, most notably as Logan Sharpe in They Called Me Mister Tibbs opposite Sidney Poitier. It was in 1975 and Landau’s performance in another iconic role, Commander John Koenig in Space: 1999, that helped maintain his star profile. While he continued to work regularly, it wasn’t until over a decade later, in 1988 that his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, for his role in Tucker: The Man and His Dream - he also received the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture.

He received his second Oscar nomination the following year for his appearance in Woody Allen’s Crimes and Misdemeanors and then in 1994 his performance as Bela Lugosi in Tim Burton’s Ed Wood earned him not only an Academy Award but also a Screen Actors Guild Award and a Golden Globe. Despite those accolades, the film, which starred Johnny Depp in the lead role, was not a hit making a disappointing $5.89 million domestically on an $18 million budget.

Landau later reteamed with Burton for a role in Sleepy Hollow and again to voice a Vincent Price-like science teacher in the horror-movie homage, Frankenweenie. His other notable roles in recent years include the 1996 political drama City Hall, The X-Files: Fight the Future, Rounders, Edtv and The Majestic all of which had varying degrees of success at the box office but failed to be smash hits. However, when not on screen, Landau turned his hand to directing, teaching and was also executive director at the Actors Studio West where he helped the likes of Jack Nicholson and Angelica Huston. In recognition of his services to the motion picture industry Landau was also given the honor of a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame - it can be found at 6841 Hollywood Boulevard.

Martin Landau died from "unexpected complications" on July 15, 2017. He was 89-years-old.