CLEVELAND, Ohio - Martin Landau dazzled and delighted CBS viewers with his three-season run as master of disguise Rollin Hand on "Mission: Impossible." Shifting from one wildly different identity to another during his 1966-69 tenure on the spy series, this remarkably gifted and versatile actor, more than anyone else, made the improbable seem possible.

You never knew what to expect. One week, Rollin was impersonating an East German police official; the next, an elderly doctor.

It now seems wonderfully fitting that this was his role on the elite government team. Landau, after all, was a chameleon-like player, capable of being heroic, villainous, creepy, sympathetic, menacing, funny, tragic, charming, evil, romantic, brutal, passionate, cold-blooded, sensitive, you name it.

Throughout his long career, Landau didn't so much change his face (a la Rollin) as he did the type of character he portrayed. And this he did brilliantly, moving between film and television work since the late 1950s.

Landau, who died July 15 at 89, was an actor's actor. And he was a working actor, which meant occasionally landing in a project like the 1981 TV movie "The Harlem Globetrotters on Gilligan's Island." He went where the work was, knowing that, if you keep swinging, the home-run chances will come your way.

They did, and Landau made the most of them. Here are 10 essential performances drawn from his long list of film and TV titles:

"North By Northwest" (1959): Landau provided a chilling presence as Leonard, ruthless henchman to enemy spy Phillip Vandamm (James Mason) in director Alfred Hitchcock's thriller about an advertising executive (Cary Grant) drawn into a murderous game of espionage.

"The Outer Limits" (1963): "The Man Who Was Never Born" was the first and finest of Landau's two memorable turns on the science-fiction anthology series. He plays Andro, a mutated human dying of a disfiguring disease in 2148. He returned to "The Outer Limits" in 1964 to star in "The Bellero Shield," playing a scientist who invents a laser powerful enough to allow an alien to visit our world.

"The Twilight Zone" (1964): Richard Donner directed "The Jeopardy Room," a Rod Serling story about a KGB major, Ivan Kuchenko (Landau), wanting to defect but targeted for assassination. Landau already had visited "The Twilight Zone," playing a very different role from the sadistically treated Kuchenko. In fact, he played the sadistic bully, Western gunfighter Dan Hotaling, in Serling's 1959 first-season episode "Mr. Denton on Doomsday."

"Mission: Impossible" (1966-69): It's impossible not to include the series and Landau's contribution. It has been reported that Landau was on the short list to play Mr. Spock, the iconic "Star Trek" Vulcan portrayed by Leonard Nimoy. When Landau left "Mission: Impossible," he was replaced by Nimoy.

"Columbo" (1973): Landau's remarkable versatility again was on display in "Double Shock," a second-season episode of Peter Falk's classic mystery series. You typically saw the murder take place in the opening minutes of "Columbo," so the identity of the killer wasn't in doubt. That seemed to be the case with "Double Shock," but the fun was compounded when you realized Landau was playing twin brothers Dexter and Norman Paris - one reserved, the other outgoing.

"Space: 1999" (1975-77): It didn't have the impact of "Star Trek" or "Star Wars," yet this British series (syndicated in the United States) was an ambitious attempt to mold a science-fiction adventure around a morality play. Landau starred as Commander John Koenig, leader of the runaway Moonbase Alpha.

"Tucker: The Man and His Dream" (1988): Landau received a best supporting actor Oscar nomination for his portrayal of Abe Karatz, the New York financier who helps Detroit engineer Preston Tucker (Jeff Bridges) open a plant to manufacture the "car of the future." The biographical film was directed by Francis Ford Coppola.

"Crimes and Misdemeanors" (1989): Landau again was nominated as best supporting actor, this time for playing Judah Rosenthal, the ophthalmologist who arranges for the murder of his mistress. The existential mix of comedy and drama was directed by Woody Allen.

"Max and Helen" (1990): The acclaimed cable movie featured Landau as Holocaust survivor, Nazi hunter and writer Simon Wiesenthal.

"Ed Wood" (1994): The third time was the charm. Again nominated for best supporting actor, this time he took home the Oscar. He was sensational as the aging Bela Lugosi in director Tim Burton's movie about low-budget filmmaker Ed Wood ("Plan Nine from Outer Space").

Landau's victory led to a notorious moment during the Academy Awards ceremony. The actor had his thank-you speech unceremoniously cut short by the blaring orchestra. A visibly upset Landau pounded the podium and yelled, "No!"

But he didn't get the chance to finish his comments - at least, not on the Oscar stage.

"The reason I was so upset was that I was about to dedicate that win to Bela Lugosi," Landau told me during an interview for a book on all things "Dracula." "It was my chance to express my admiration and my thanks. I very much wanted to do that. I wanted to honor him."

That, too, was Martin Landau. Over the last week, so many people have remarked on what a nice man he was, and that's because he was.