King Ludwig III of Bavaria

Ludwig III (Ludwig Luitpold Josef Maria Aloys Alfried; 7 January 1845 – 18 October 1921) was the last King of Bavaria, reigning from 1913 to 1918. Initially he served in the Bavarian military as a lieutenant and went on to hold the rank of Oberleutnant during the Austro-Prussian War. He entered politics at the age of 18 becoming a member of the Bavarian Legislature and was a keen participant in politics, supporting electoral reforms. Later in life he served as regent and de facto head of state from 1912 to 1913, ruling for his cousin, Otto. After the Bavarian parliament passed a law allowing him to do so, Ludwig deposed Otto and assumed the throne for himself. He led Bavaria during World War I. His short reign was seen as championing conservative causes and he was influenced by the Catholic encyclical Rerum novarum.

After the German Revolution of 1918, the German Empire was dissolved and the Weimar Republic was created. As a result of this revolution, the Bavarian throne was abolished along with the other monarchies of the German states, ending the House of Wittelsbach's 738-year reign over Bavaria. Fearing that he might be a victim of an assassination, Ludwig fled to Hungary, Liechtenstein and then Switzerland. He returned to Bavaria in 1920 and lived at Wildenwart Castle. Ludwig would die shortly after, when was staying at Nádasdy Mansion in Sárvár.

Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_III_of_Bavaria

Maria Theresa of Austria-Este

Maria Theresa Henriette Dorothea of Austria-Este (2 July 1849 – 3 February 1919) was the last Queen of Bavaria. She was the only child of Archduke Ferdinand Karl Viktor of Austria-Este and Archduchess Elisabeth Franziska of Austria.

Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maria_Theresa_of_Austria-Este_(1849–1919)

Children:

Rupprecht, Crown Prince of Bavaria

Adelgunde, Princess of Hohenzollern

Princess Maria, Duchess of Calabria

Prince Karl

Prince Franz

Mathilde, Princess Ludwig of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha

Prince Wolfgang

Princess Hildegarde

Princess Notburga

Wiltrud, Duchess of Urach

Princess Helmtrud

Princess Dietlinde

Gundelinde, Countess of Preysing-Lichtenegg-Moos