A cape of ermine of Maria Theresa, Queen of Bavaria (1849-1919)

lined in cream-coloured silk, the edges trimmed in lace, the inside applied with a label reading Prinzessin Ludwig von Bayern; combined with a muff, contained in a green cardboard box with paper labels reading Ihre Majestät Frau Koenigin Marie von Neapel, combined with a black and white photograph of Marie Sophie, Queen of Naples, Duchess in Bavaria, contained in an oval frame; further combined with a stole and two smaller items, all of ermine. Estimate 1,500—2,500 EUR - Lot Sold 5,250 EUR

PROVENANCE: Maria Theresa, Queen of Bavaria

Thence by descent

NOTE: Maria Theresa Archduchess of Austria-Este was born in 1849 as the only child to Archduke Ferdinand of Austria-Este (1821-1849) and his wife Archduchess Elisabeth of Austria (1831-1903). She had been predestined by her paternal uncle Francis V, Duke of Modena (1819-1875), to marry Duke Ferdinand of Tuscany. Instead she married in 1868 Prince Ludwig of Bavaria whom she had met and fallen in love with at the burial of her friend Archduchess Mathilde of Austria the year before. When Francis V died, leaving no surviving issue, Maria Theresa became a Jacobite pretender to the thrones of England and Scotland and was recognised as Mary IV (by those who do not count Mary Stuart, Mary III).

The marriage was a happy one, resulting in thirteen children. The couple and their extended family lived a relatively humble existence, mainly on their farming estate at Leustetten until 1912. After the death of the Prince Regent Luitpold of Bavaria, the de facto ruler of Bavaria, Ludwig succeeded his father, deposing King Otto of Bavaria - his cousin - who had occupied the throne, in name only for twenty-seven years, in 1913 and proclaiming himself King Ludwig III. By then Maria Theresa was 64 years old when she ascended the throne and the first catholic queen ever of the Kingdom of Bavaria.

Early in 1918 the couple celebrated their Golden Wedding but later that year, in November, on the day her husband was forced to abdicate, the last Queen of Bavaria died, leaving the frail Ludwig shattered. He died in 1921 and was buried alongside his wife in the cathedral of Munich.

The cape of ermine offered herewith once belonged to the Queen and can be seen worn by her on several portrait photographs. One shows her standing regally, the cape loosely draped over her shoulders, the lace spilling in folds over her arm and silk dress, a faint smile playing over her lips. The Munich-born painter Walther Firle (1859-1929) was commissioned to paint the couple in 1914. Again she is portrayed with the cape, this time however seen from the back with firm expression, the ermine emphasizing her stature.

The muff was owned by Marie Sophie of Bavaria (1841-1925), the younger sister of Elisabeth Empress of Austria, better known as 'Sissi'. In 1859 she married Francis II King of the Two Sicilies (1836-1894). Because of her courage during the Italian Battle of Independence she is known as the 'heroine of Gaeta'.

The white fur with its black-tipped tail from the winter coat of the stoat is referred to as 'Ermine', a symbol for purity and honour. Legend has it that the ermine would rather die than soiling its fur. The precious material was only to be worn by members of high aristocracy, ruling princes and electors, kings and emperors but also the Pope.