The Lingzi Foundation is a 501 (c) (3), not-for-profit organization based in Boston, Massachusetts formed by the family of Lu Lingzi, who perished during the Boston Marathon bombing attack, to preserve and perpetuate Lingzi’s life example.

The Foundation provides opportunities to those who share Lingzi’s ambition and dreams to enrich their lives, open their minds, and break down barriers by learning from her positive spirit, unparalleled work ethic, perseverance, and humanism.

Lingzi lived life fully with joy by appreciating family and friends, food and its ability to bring people together, and the beauty of the environment around her. The Foundation seeks to identify and partner with organizations that share these passions and support their inspirational initiatives.

Read Lingzi’s Story

Throughout May, we proudly extended our support for Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month! This annual celebration allowed us to deepen our engagement with local communities. In addition to sponsoring the AAPI 5k with Chinese American Association of Lexington – CAAL, we continued our commitment to fostering cultural appreciation among youth with ReadBoston. Officers from the Boston Police Department (Official), alongside members of The Lingzi Foundation, enthusiastically participated in reading sessions at elementary schools across Boston.

All of us at The Lingzi Foundation wanted to express our deepest gratitude for your unwavering dedication in fundraising for the Boston Marathon. Your hard work will sponsor multiple community partnerships, in memory and honor of Lingzi. Despite the challenges of training, your sheer determination and resilience shone through as you crossed that finish line. Your commitment and passion are truly inspiring, and we are immensely proud of you for making such a positive impact. Check out the Lingzi Foundation 2024 Boston Marathon team!

We have wrapped up our Summer 2023 “Teach Me To Fish” virtual cooking series! Special thanks to our partners in this program – Boston Police Activities League, Inc. and the police officers at Boston Police Community Engagement Bureau, who interacted regularly with our youth and their families to make the program a success. Check out some of these delicious dishes created by our participants and more on Teach Me To Fish.