Eyemart Express

Eyemart Express is founded in 1990. The focus is to get you the right glasses at the right price. Eyemart Express is the only retailer with a lens lab in every store that can produce 90% of its glasses on the same day. There are more than 2,000 frames to choose from, including designer brands and safety glasses. At their online store, you can buy prescription glasses anywhere and have them delivered to your door. You can choose the best glasses at the right price and enjoy same-day service.

Costco Optical

Costco Optical is staffed by highly trained opticians and is well known in the Optical industry. The Optics division also stocks a wide variety of contact lenses, brand name frames, and sunglasses, and provides the latest high-definition lens technology. Costco now accepts most vision plans.

Disadvantages of Metal Frames

Metal frames may cause the skin to be sensitive easily. Generally, if the skin allergy to metal, they can choose titanium, but the price is pretty expensive. It may cost thousands of yuan. The frame of the other alloy is not too expensive. Sweat will make the screws and temples of the metal rust, affecting the appearance, which is bad for the skin.

What Are Rimless Glasses?

A right pair of glasses enhance your appearance as well as your vision. If you choose a pair of unsuitable glasses, they can weigh down your face and hide delicate your features. So, more and more would like to choose the right pair of glasses and many people like rimless glasses.

What are rimless glasses? From the name, you can know the meaning. It means that there are no frames on glasses. Rimless glasses can help ease eyewear apprehension by improving your vision without overhauling your look.

In addition, rimless glasses are light weight and comfortable. Because they accent your natural beauty, your features won’t get buried under a pair of rimless glasses.

Of course, there are some advantages and disadvantages of frameless glasses. So, in the following section, we will list.

The Benefits of Glasses Without Prescription

From the above part, you have found some basic information about glasses without prescription. In this section, we will list some benefits of plain glasses.

The non-prescription glasses are inexpensive, and they are widely available in a selection of styles and shapes. In addition, non-prescription glasses can be easily replaced as fashion changes.

Meanwhile, everything has two different sides. So, there are also some negative voices of glasses without prescription.

The width of your glasses is important.

The width of your glasses is not just to make you look more attractive. It's related to the position of your pupils in each lens, which is inextricably linked to the quality of your vision. The frame could be slightly wider than the zygomatic bones. It should be wide enough not to touch the temple. It should be close to holding a finger. This is especially important for people who wear bifocals or progressive glasses, so you can see through the right part of the lens.

Full-Rim Frame Glasses

This kind of spectacle frame is relatively common. This kind of spectacle frame is relatively strong, not easy to deform, and can bear a considerable part of the thickness of the lens. Choose a pair of full-frame glasses according to your face shape. Wearing it is a fashionable choice. Women can choose thin-edged metal frames, while men choose sheet metal frames to look younger and more fashionable.