Eyemart Express Names Jason Shanks Interim CEO

Company Veteran Assumes Leadership Role during Executive Search Process

DALLAS—April 29, 2022—National optical retailer Eyemart Express (or “the Company”) today announced that General Counsel & Head of Managed Vision Care Operations Jason Shanks has been named interim Chief Executive Officer while the Company conducts a search for a new leader. Shanks succeeds Michael Bender, who led the company for five years.

“I am grateful for my time and the people I have had the pleasure of working with at Eyemart Express, and I am so proud of the many significant accomplishments we have achieved over the last five years,” said Bender. “Eyemart Express is a very special company and is well-positioned for the future.”

An eight-year veteran of Eyemart Express, Shanks brings extensive knowledge of the Company and outstanding leadership skills to the interim role. In addition to serving as General Counsel, Jason is deeply involved in the business operations, including his role as Head of Managed Vision Care Operations.

“I am pleased to have the opportunity to deepen my involvement with Eyemart Express while we search for a new CEO to drive the next phase of our business growth,” Shanks said. “The Board and executive team are committed to continued investment in the business—from developing talent to adding new locations and expanding our doctor partnerships. We are confident Eyemart Express will build on our current strengths and be well-positioned to take advantage of emerging opportunities.”

Eyemart has over 230 stores across 42 states today, opening over 60 new stores since 2018, and recording positive same store sales growth for 10 of the past 11 years.

Jason will be supported by a strong executive team including Katy Hanson, Chief Marketing Officer; Mike Loftus, Chief Financial Officer; Gianni Venturi, Chief People Officer; Dr. Tom Patera, Senior Executive Vice President; and Keith O’Connor, Vice President. With this team in place, and their industry expertise, Eyemart Express expects a seamless transition.

“We are grateful for Michael’s guidance and leadership of this wonderful business and thank him for stewarding us through the most challenging time in our history these past few years,” said Chris Harris, Chairman of the Board of Directors. “At the same time, we couldn’t be more excited about the future of this business and the investments we are of making to bolster our leadership team, our employees, and our customers as the leading independent optical retailer in the country.”