Reshma Aur Shera (translation: Reshma and Shera) is a 1971 Hindi crime drama film produced and directed by Sunil Dutt and starring Waheeda Rehman as Reshma and Sunil Dutt as Shera. It also stars Vinod Khanna, Amitabh Bachchan, Raakhee and Amrish Puri in supporting roles. Sunil Dutt's son Sanjay Dutt who was 12 years at the time appears briefly as a qawali singer in his first film appearance.

Contents

Synopsis

Cast

Music

References

Reshma Aur Shera was well received by the critics internationally and was nominated for the Golden Bear at the 22nd Berlin International Film Festival. It was selected as the Indian entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 44th Academy Awards but was not accepted as a nominee.

The film won music director, Jaidev, his first National Film Award for Best Music Direction in 1972, noted for classics like "Ek meethi si chuban, ek thandi si agan" (lyrics by Udhav Kumar) and "Tu chanda main Chandini" sung by Lata Mangeshkar (lyrics by Balkavi Bairagi).

Synopsis

Set against the backdrop of Rajasthan, Reshma (Waheeda Rehman) and Shera (Sunil Dutt) love each other in the midst of a violent feud between their clans. When their families find out about their relationship, Chotu (Amitabh Bachchan), Shera's mute sharpshooting brother carries out his father Sagat Singh (Jayant)'s orders to kill Reshma's father (K. N. Singh) and her recently married brother Gopal (Ranjeet). Unable to bear the grief of Gopal's widowed bride (Raakhee), Shera kills his own father believing he actually pulled the trigger. After this tragedy, Reshma and Shera's family's feud will end in more tragedy as misunderstandings lead to more bloodshed between the clans.

Shera swears to kill Chotu and protect Reshma's family. Shera searches for Chotu, who hides in Reshma's house and seeks protection from her. The movie's climax is when Shera awaits outside Reshma's house to kill Chotu. At the moment, Chotu and Reshma emerge from the house as a married couple. Shera notices sindoor on Reshma's forehead and realizes that he cannot kill her husband, who is now Chotu, thus ending the bloodshed.

Cast

Waheeda Rehman .... Reshma

Sunil Dutt .... Shera

Amitabh Bachchan ..... Chotu (Shera's brother)

Vinod Khanna .... Vijay

Ranjeet .... Gopal (Reshma's brother)

Raakhee .... Gopal's wife

Jayant .... Sagat Singh (Shera's father)

K. N. Singh .... Chaudhary (Reshma's father)

Amrish Puri .... Rehmat Khan

Sanjay Dutt .... Qawali singer (child artist)

Naval Kumar .... Jagat Singh (Shera's Brother)

Music

"Tu Chandaa Main Chaandani, Tu Taruvar Main Shaakh Re" - Lata Mangeshkar

"Tauba Tauba Meri Tauba, Ek To Ye Bharpur Jawani" - Asha Bhosle

"Zalim Meri Sharab Me Ye Kya Mila Diya" - Manna Dey

"Mai Aaj Pawan Me Paau" - Lata Mangeshkar

"Jabse Lagan Lagaayi Re, Umar Bhar Nind Na Aayi Re" - Asha Bhosle

"Nafarat Ki Ek Hi Thokar Ne Ye Kya Se Kya Kar Dala Re" - Manna Dey