Reshma aur Shera

Director: Sunil Dutt (and S. Sukhdev*)

Year: 1971

The opening sequence to Reshma aur Shera, an “art film in disguise” with uncredited directorial work by legendary FDI documentarian S. Sukhdev. Sunil Dutt and Waheeda Rehman headline as star-crossed lovers caught in the middle of a Rajput clan war on the arid edge of western Rajasthan. There is much controversy about the making of this violent and unusual film. Supposedly conceived by Sukhdev as a modern retelling of a Rajasthani folktale, it reads as critique, rather than celebration of the macho Rajput ideal. The story goes that Sunil Dutt and Sukhdev had a falling out, perhaps after the entire film was shot, and that Dutt fired the director, taking over the reigns and finishing the film. It is officially a Sunil Dutt directed feature, but there is little doubt that Sukhdev’s unique vision is behind many scenes in this beautifully shot film.

Just one, very obvious (and very charming) example: check out this sequence at a fair and the way that the camera follows Waheeda Rehman’s face as she experiences almost unseemly delight while riding a small old-school ferris wheel. And a similar sequence on a merry-go-round. Total Sukhdev, no? In fact, unconventional camera angles abound in this film. And then there are the many beautiful, documentary-style shots of the rippling sand dunes, of cattle fairs and camels, ancient sandstone temples and Thar desert realia. This spicy, perfervid, bloody masala khichdi of cinema, documentary and romance could only have originated in the restless imagination of Sukhdev.

Whatever happened between Sukhdev and Sunil Dutt, the experience evidently convinced him to return to the documentary form for good. An interesting side note is that one of the most immediate consequences of Sukhdev’s getting the sack from Dutt Saheb was that Amrish Puri’s role (as friendly Muslim advisor Rehmat Khan) was scaled back significantly. This was a huge blow to the actor who, at the age of 40, was still trying to establish himself in films. It wasn’t until 1975 and the keen, sympathetic eye of director Shyam Benegal that Puri really got a role worthy of his talent, as the feudal landlord, Anna, in Benegal’s Nishant.

Amitabh Bachchan reminisced recently about the filming of Reshma aur Shera, which was one of his earliest films. It was also the first screen appearance of Sanjay Dutt, just thirteen years old at the time. Here he is in a wonderful and highly authentic (by filmi standards) qawwali number (with music by Jaidev): ““Zaalim meri sharab mein yeh kya mila diya.” Something Sanjay Dutt should know about, I gather.

The same song contains this very strange, hypnotic fantasy sequence that turns out to be an emotionally pivotal moment in the film, and has, to my mind, Sukhdev’s fingerprints all over it.

One can find countless such instances throughout Reshma aur Shera: does anyone seriously believe it was Sunil Dutt’s idea to film the many violent Rajasthani gang fights between rival clans like this? Or this? (Dutt’s Yaadein (1964) was experimental to be sure, but not in this way at all – the experimentalist inside Dutt was focused inward, on the psyche; Sukhdev, by contrast, is always looking out, at the social, at man in his context. It may well be that these two differing orientations were simply irreconcilable.)

I love this sequence, one of two where Shera intervenes to stop a sacrifice – and the film is full of elliptical thematic repetition – watch how tension is built by switching between close up shots of the faces of the spectators.