Founded in 1882, the Lane College is a non-profit private liberal arts higher education institution located in the urban setting of the small city of Jackson (population range of 50,000-249,999 inhabitants), Tennessee. Officially accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges, Lane College is a very small-sized (uniRank enrollment range: 1,000-1,999 students) coeducational US higher education institution formally affiliated with the Christian-Methodist religion. Lane College offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as pre-bachelor's degrees (i.e. certificates, diplomas, associate or foundation) and bachelor's degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. The acceptance rate range is 100% making this US higher education organization a non-selective institution. International students are welcome to apply for enrollment. Lane College also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, housing, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, online courses and distance learning opportunities, as well as administrative services.

Gender Admission

This institution admits Men and Women (coed).

Minority Serving

This institution is a Historically Black Institution and, historically, has a special focus on promoting education and research among this specific ethnic group(s).

Admission Selection

Has Lane College a selective admission policy? None, open admission policy.

Admission Rate

Lane College's acceptance rate range is 100% making this institution a non-selective higher education institution.

Student Enrollment

Lane College has an enrollment range of 1,000-1,999 students making it a very small-sized institution.

Academic Staff

This institution has a range of 50-99 academic employees (Faculty).

Control Type

Lane College is a private higher education institution.

Entity Type

Lane College is a non-profit higher education institution.

Campus Setting

This institution's main campus is located in a Urban setting.

Academic Calendar

This institution adopts a Semesters type of academic calendar.

Minority Serving

This institution is a Historically Black Institution and, historically, has a special focus on promoting education and research among the above specific ethnic group(s).

Religious Affiliation

Lane College has a Christian-Methodist affiliation (African Methodist Episcopal Church - www.ame-church.com).