Lane College, located in Jackson, TN, is a small, private, co-educational, church-related institution that provides a liberal arts curriculum leading to baccalaureate degrees in the arts and sciences.

Lane College is a fully accredited, four-year, Christian institution that offers stimulating academic engagement amid an exceptional student experience. Lane College accepts students where they are and takes them to where they ought to be through a carefully designed and pedagogically sound nurturing system that encompasses academic rigor, social involvement, and spiritual enlightenment. The chief tenant of Lane’s philosophy is that a student’s past performance is no predictor of her or his future achievement…that all students can learn and thrive once the elements of doubt are supplanted by the assurance of possibilities. We are unmistakably Lane…where success reigns…through the fusion of aspiration, toil, learned lessons, persistence, and prayer.

Lane College Facts

Click to read more

Read more facts about Lane College

Lane College Student Receives Ossie Davis Legacy Scholarship

After a rigorous selection process, the family of the late actors and activists Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee and UNCF have announced Ms. Jade Allen as the recipient of the Ossie Davis Legacy Scholarship. Allen is a senior Communications major at Lane College, a historically black college located in Jackson, Tennessee. She is currently the highest ranking senior in her graduating class and maintains a 3.9 GPA. In honor of Mr. Davis’ 100th birthday, Allen is acknowledged as the scholarship’s Centennial Scholar.

“Thank you for awarding me the ​Ossie Davis Legacy Scholarship. I am sincerely grateful for this award because it gives me the opportunity to further my education in my field of study without the worry of financial burdens,” recipient Jade Allen said through a statement. Allen completed her first film, My Father’s Grass, a documentary, and plans to continue creating biopics that highlight a myriad of world cultures.>>Read More

Lane College Staff

The chief tenant of Lane’s philosophy is that a student’s past performance is no predictor of her or his future achievement…that all students can learn and thrive once the elements of doubt are supplanted by the assurance of possibilities.

Dr. Logan C. Hampton President, Lane College