Iconic music label launches first division in Asia

Island Records Philippines will be dedicated to helping the best Filipino music talent achieve domestic success whilst reaching new audiences worldwide

Label launch roster includes some of the most exciting and popular domestic artists; Juan Karlos; Over October & Lala Vinzon, alongside new signings Zack Tabudlo; Fern. and One Click Straight.

MANILA, July 23, 2020– Universal Music Philippines (UMP), a division of Universal Music Group (UMG), the world leader in music-based entertainment, today announced the launch of Island Records Philippines, a new domestic label division dedicated to helping the best musical talent from the Philippines to achieve local success, whilst reaching new audiences worldwide.

The launch marks the beginning of a new chapter in the illustrious history of Island Records, which was founded 61 years ago in Jamaica by Chris Blackwell and has helped shape and influence global artist and music culture for more than six decades. Opening its first international division within Asia, Island Records Philippines will honour the historic legacy of the label, by celebrating the rich diversity of music produced throughout the country, which itself is an island nation, made up of 7641 individual islands.

Island Records Philippines launches with a flagship roster that includes some of the most popular and respected Filipino talent including; Juan Karlos; Over October and Lala Vinzon, alongside new label signings Zack Tabudlo; Fern. and One Click Straight.

The announcement was made today via a virtual live-streaming press conference from Manila by Enzo Valdez, MD, Universal Music Philippines.

In making the announcement, Valdez said, “We are excited to launch Island Records here in the Philippines and to build our own family of local artists, that can further extend the huge legacy of Island within the region and beyond. In the coming years, we will look to establish Island as a home to some of the most impactful and important artists from the Philippines, whilst introducing them to new audiences around the world through UMG’s unrivalled global network of companies around the world.”

Calvin Wong, CEO, Universal Music Southeast Asia & Senior Vice President, Asia Universal Music said, “In keeping with the traditions and values of the historic Island label, we are looking forward to creating a respected home for great artistry and talent from the Philippines.”

The press conference featured performances from the label’s roster of artists, alongside video messages of welcome and support from across the global Island Records family including: Island Records founder, Chris Blackwell, Darcus Beese, President, Island Records U.S., Louis Bloom, President, Island Records U.K. and artists including; PUBLIC; Skip Marley; Johnny Orlando; Olivier O’Brien; Keshi; Jack Ross and Banners.

“I’m so proud to hear that Island Records has started in the Philippines. One Love.” – Chris Blackwell, Founder, Island Records.

“A message to all the new artists in the Philippines. We are here, we are your family and we look forward to working with you.” – Darcus Beese, President & CEO, Island Records U.S.

“Island Records is rightly regarded as one of the most iconic record labels in the world since it was founded by Chris Blackwell just over 60 years ago. Through its many incredible and inspirational artists, Island has helped shift and shape culture around the globe. We are absolutely delighted that Island will have its own outpost in the Philippines, and we are sure we will share in this legacy and forge a bright and successful future. Welcome to the Island Family.” – Louis Bloom, President, Island Records U.K.

Universal Music Philippines has led the local music market for more than a decade and is currently home to an array of leading Filipino talent including; Darren Espanto & Autotellic. UMG recently announced the arrival of Def Jam Philippines, a new regional label dedicated to developing and nurturing the best in hip-hop talent and culture within the country, with its first signing the hotly tipped VVS Collective. The launch of Island Records Philippines will further strengthen its position as the natural home for the best in domestic music talent for many years to come.

The first release on Island Records Philippines is “BLESS Ü”, the new single from Juan Karlos which is released on July 24, followed by “Nangangamba” by Zack Tabudlo which follows on July 31.