Philippine Independence Day is coming up on June 12 and Johnnie Walker could not have picked a better time to celebrate the Philippines. Johnnie Walker Blue Label recently launched a Philippine limited-edition bottle. Featuring a gold-embossed map of the Philippines, only 7,107 individually numbered bottles (the number of islands in the Philippine archipelago) are produced. "Johnnie Walker has been an icon of progress and the whisky of choice for Filipinos for decades," says Marie Weckerle-Ona, Reserve Luxury Manager for Diageo Philippines. "We wanted to pay tribute to the Philippines with a Johnnie Walker Blue Label Limited Edition in a way that no other previous limited edition could-- by making it locally relevant. The map of the Philippine islands is a recognizable symbol for our country."

According to Ona, previous limited editions have been regional or global campaigns such as the collaborations with Dunhill and Porsche , the Cityscape series (featuring the skylines of New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Mumbai, Singapore and Hong Kong) and the Chinese Mythology series (themed on luck, fortune, wisdom, vision and integrity, catering to the Johnnie Walker houses in Shanghai and Beijing) but "there has never been something truly catered to the Filipino. This is where we took it upon ourselves to make it happen." The Philippines is the first Asian country to have created a gold-embossed country edition for Johnnie Walker.

"Johnnie Walker Blue Label has always been, and continues to be an emblem for those who have created something extraordinary, those who have accomplished something special and changed the world around them,” says Jon Good, general manager of Diageo Philippines. "In a country bursting with a strong sense of nationalism, we believe that the release of the Johnnie Walker Blue Label Philippine Limited Edition bottle is proper. [This] bottle is a tribute to Filipinos who continue to pursue their passions and walk the paths they envisioned for themselves.”

The bottles are only available in the Philippines, at S&R branches, Landmark Makati, Trinoma and SM stores. Perhaps the perfect pasalubong (the Filipino tradition of a "homecoming gift") for family and friends elsewhere in the world.