UNIVERSAL MUSIC GROUP PHILIPPINES ANNOUNCES RE-LAUNCH OF EMI RECORDS PHILIPPINES

Return of legendary label to foster Filipino talent

and help local artists build national and global audiences

Manila, Philippines, February 5, 2024 – Universal Music Group Philippines, a division of Universal Music Group (UMG), the world leader in music-based entertainment, has announced the re-launch of EMI Records Philippines (EMI). Sharing a vision with its iconic British counterpart that has launched so many world-renowned artists globally, throughout its 125-year history, the label will provide grassroots support for local talent and, through its regional and global network of expert teams, will develop and nurture new artists into the stars of tomorrow.

First established in 2002, the founding of EMI Records in the Philippines marked a formidable chapter in the OPM (Original Pinoy Music) industry and built a legacy of great artists such as Sandwich, Sugarfree, Hale, The Dawn, Kyla, Lea Salonga, and Bamboo. Relaunching with the same vision and ambition in 2023, EMI will continue to advocate for Filipino artists, and will curate a broad roster and array of sounds reflecting the soul of the nation.

Enzo Valdez, Managing Director, Universal Music Philippines said: “EMI has long been recognised as one of the most iconic record labels in the world. EMI Records Philippines will honour this legacy in its determination to nurture and grow the incredible local talent and showcase it to audiences across the Philippines and beyond.”

Hitting the ground running, and positioning itself firmly at the epicenter of the music community, EMI Records Philippines proudly presents both new and celebrated artists. Some of the many artists on its roster include:

Dionela

Tim Dionela (known by his stage name Dionela) has taken the Filipino music scene by storm having amassed an impressive social media following. His new single Oksihina, is poised to soar to the top of the charts in the Philippines, with nearly one million streams to date.

Daniel Paringit

Daniel Paringit’s compositions are infused with emotion and relatability. With a passion for collaboration, he takes a holistic approach to the art of music-making. As anticipation for his music peaks, Paringit is about to release his latest single, Dinggin.

CHNDTR

Groovy, “punk-o-pop” sensation CHNDTR isn’t just a band; they’re a musical force with a mission. At the helm is Chin Detera–lead vocalist, guitarist, joined by Joko Reantaso and Heintje Mendoza on guitar, with Jerome Prada on drums and Kit de Gala on bass. Their collective mission is to inspire through their passion for music.

Gracenote

With over a decade in the Filipino music landscape, alternative pop rock act Gracenote has made their mark among fans and music critics alike. One of the most active and exciting bands in the OPM landscape, the collective composed of Eunice Jorge (vocals, keyboards, violin), Jazz Jorge (bass), EJ Pichay (drums), and Tatsi Jamnague (guitars), pours their hearts out on every composition, song, and performance, including future releases that are bound to captivate audiences ever more.

Hale

A mainstay of the glorious Filipino band scene in the 2000s, Hale has continued to remain a stronghold in the soundtrack of audiences that span multiple generations. With a multitude of pop culture shifting and chart-topping songs to their legendary name, the alternative rock band composed of Champ Lui Pio, Roll Martinez, Sheldon Gellada, Pao Santiago, and Chino David is raring and ready to rev up the stage with their new tracks in this new chapter.

The Voice Kids: Winner Roster

Honoring its commitment to nurturing fresh talent, up-and-coming artists joining EMI Records Philippines include The Voice Kidswinners Elha Nympha, Cydel Gabutero, and Shane Bernabe. Other rising stars signed to the label include Miss Ramonne, Gabriel Tagadtad, Dave Trinidad, Jenzen Guino, Patrick Quiroz, and Waltz.

Universal Music Group Philippines has led the local music market for more than a decade and is currently home to a wide array of leading Filipino talent, including: Zack Tabudlo, juan karlos, Moira Dela Torre, Zild, Yeng Constantino, and more. In recent years, UMG has launched affiliates of both its Island and Def Jam Records in the Philippines. The launch of EMI in the Philippines will further strengthen UMG’s position as the natural home for the best in domestic music talent.

About Universal Music Group

At Universal Music Group, we exist to shape culture through the power of artistry. UMG is the world leader in music-based entertainment, with a broad array of businesses engaged in recorded music, music publishing, merchandising, and audiovisual content. Featuring the most comprehensive catalogue of recordings and songs across every musical genre, UMG identifies and develops artists and produces and distributes the most critically acclaimed and commercially successful music in the world. Committed to artistry, innovation, and entrepreneurship, UMG fosters the development of services, platforms, and business models in order to broaden artistic and commercial opportunities for our artists and create new experiences for fans. For more information, visit www.universalmusic.com.

Photo:

From top-left: Heintje (CHNDTR), Dionela, Dave Trinidad, Jenzen Guino, Patrick Quiroz, Waltz, Elha Nympha, Gabriel Tagadtad, Daniel Paringit, Jazz (Gracenote), Tatsi (Gracenote), and EJ (Gracenote).