1. By Libby Jones Research Into Drama Film Genre

2. What makes a drama film? • The purpose of a dramatic storyline is to move the audience emotionally. Drama films depend mostly on the development of realistic characters dealing with emotional issues. • In most cases the film concentrates on normal character(s) that is dealing with a conflict or dilemma. Dramas often give actors a chance to stretch into a role that other genres wouldn’t allow them to do. This is because drama films focus on building up characters that the audience can engage with.

3. Conventions of Drama films: •Portrays a characters journey and developments •Exhibits real life characters, situations, settings and stories. •Intense social interaction •Dramatic sounds and exaggerated performance.

4. Sub genres of drama Drama is a very broad genre and sub-genres of drama often overlap. Sub genres include…

5. Sub genres of drama: Crime drama generally follows a character(s) involved in criminal activity or law enforcement and the justice/legal system.

6. Sub genres of drama: Historical drama Films that focus on dramatic events in history particularly war films. Examples:

7. Sub genres of drama: Comedy drama A drama film that uses an equal, or nearly equal balance of humour and serious content.

8. Sub genres of drama:Melodrama a sub-type of drama films that uses plots that appeal to the heightened emotions of the audience. These films often put the character in danger to appeal to the emotions of the audience. Melodramatic plots often deal with "crises of human emotion, failed romance or friendship, strained familial situations, tragedy, illness, neuroses, or emotional and physical hardship." (often including a central female character) that would directly appeal to feminine audiences. Also called tearjerkers, or "chick flicks". If they are targeted to a male audience, they can be nicknamed "guy cry" films

9. Sub genres of drama:Romantic drama Drama film which dwells on the elements of romantic love.

10. Sub genres of drama:Period Piece These drama films focus on a specific time era. The era in which the film is set adds not only to the plot, but to the characters and costumes as well. A Period Piece films are often based on a novel. These films tend to have a longer run time than traditional Dramas.

11. History of the drama genre: Early years – 1940’S In the early years of film there were mostly pantomime styled melodrama in silent films. In 1940 Films like The grapes of wrath show the effects of the depression.

12. History of the drama genre: 1950’s The 1950s, began a rise in well-known dramatic actors. Montgomery Clift, Glenn Ford, James Dean, Bette Davis, and Marilyn Monroe were notable dramatic actors. Dramatic Films focused on character relationships and development. All About Eve (1950) focused on women, and their relationship with men. Rebel Without a Cause (1955) displayed teenage angst. Films like 12 Angry Men (1957) and Anatomy of a Murder (1959) show the inner workings of a courtroom.

13. History of the drama genre: 1960’s The 1960s brought politically driven dramas focusing on war, such as: • Judgment at Nuremberg (1961) • Flashback (1969) • The Manchurian Candidate (1962). Sports dramas became inspiration such as: • The Hustler (1961) • Downhill Racer (1969).

14. History of the drama genre: 1970’s During the 1970s, modern dramatic directors made some of their first films. Francis Ford Coppola directed The Godfather (1972). • Martin Scorsese directed Taxi Driver (1976), Mean Streets (1973), and musical drama New York, New York (1977). • Sylvester Stallone created one of the most successful sports drama franchises with Rocky (1976) and also directed the sequel Rocky II (1979). In addition, in sports drama were films that focused on the struggle of athletes such as: • Brian's Song (1970), • The Longest Yard (1974). War films and specifically World War II films were produced, giving the most realistic adaptation of the war seen in films at that time. Such as: • Tora! Tora! Tora! (1970) • Patton (1970) • Apocalypse Now (1979) which all show the trials and hardships of war and are still considered classic war films.

15. History of the drama genre:1980’s In the 1980s, dramatic film put emphasis on highly emotional themes. • Do the Right Thing (1989), • The Colour Purple (1985) These were full character studies of African American culture and history. War dramas: • Platoon (1986) - showed the horrors of Vietnam. • Das Boot (1981) -focused on the German viewpoint of World War II. Drama, with a science fiction edge was a theme when Steven Spielberg directed E.T. (1982), and Ridley Scott directed Blade Runner (1982), and also The Accused (1988).

16. History of the drama genre:1990’s During the 1990s: Crime dramas: Goodfellas (1990) Themes of hope: The Shawshank Redemption (1994), Schindler's List (1993). • Dramas also took a turn with existentialist thrillers such as Fight Club (1999) • Coming of age was dealt with in Good Will Hunting (1997), • race relationships were a theme in American History X (1998), • Comedy-drama was featured with films like Forrest Gump (1994), Jerry Maguire (1996) and As Good as It Gets (1997). • Child-oriented dramas also became more popular in Disney movies.

17. History of the drama genre: 20th century – modernday 20th century to modern day the drama genre has expanded dramatically with an increase in demand of drama films.

18. Common Characters in Drama films: The Protagonist He/she is the generally the main character in the film. The audience feels sympathy towards this character that always triumphs over the villain. This character also has such as bravery, determination and a desire to overcome evil. This character is often put under trails so that these characteristics can be exposed to the audience. The protagonist us most commonly played by a male character put the use of female characters acting this role in films has increased in the past few years. The protagonist brings a certain presence when entering and leaving the scene and always attempts to solve the problems that occur. Examples:

19. Common Characters in Drama films: The Antagonist The antagonist goes to extreme length to get exactly what he/she wants this could include breaking the law, hurting someone or potentially killing someone. This character primarily looks out for themself and seems to posse little empathy towards any character. There is always a feud between the protagonist and antagonist which makes the antagonist determined to ruin the life of the protagonist. Examples:

20. Common Characters in Drama films: The helper/best friend: this character displays the characteristics of loyalty and trust. The helper always manages to be there for the protagonist and usually aids them throughout the whole film. This character often has moral codes which might have to be broken in order to help the protagonist achieve victory over the antagonist. The helper acts as a best friend to the protagonist and try’s to help as much as possible. If this character is a female and the protagonist is a male then it’s likely they will fall in love by the end of the movie. Examples: