In the words of the director, the film had a gestation period of three years. And it shows. The technical quality of picture and sound is very high. Also editing, photography, and music support has very interesting pieces. The characters are well defined and none is superfluous. There is a communion between the story told from the unique perspective of the student theater (Lira also studied acting) and the facts that are living ever more intense and pushing the limits of differentiation between reality and fiction.

The story takes place in different environments, but always focused on the capital's nightlife. In clubs, vacant sites rediscovered. We are surrounded by prostitution, artistic expression, censorship and intolerance. As they move the minute we begin to realize that these students do not know exactly who they are, and who want to find that identity in any media. And this leads to emotional and mental stability shattered by more than one occasion, they are young so internalized as are just learning, like a sponge absorbing information, they begin to fall to this "new world" they find in each person and each corner crossing.

"Drama" shows us a world that sails between real and unreal, but with characters and events quite common and credible. Us into the mind of a normal student, which may well exist, or there-about us. But we can extrapolate this argument to any point in the life of any person: a tormented life, troubled by his past, knowing the youth open options that were previously unknown distant in their day to day. And how, driven by an external agent in this case the professor will discover everything differently. Of course, this can be for better or for worse. Anything can happen, and this film certainly accepting various alternatives.

"Drama" is a very interesting first feature Matías Lira, and as such an invitation to visit the bohemian underworld, deep and absorbing, because all that is "Drama", and appreciated. And double thanks for being a domestic product, showing once again the high quality of our new directors.