Patricio Borghetti and Grettell Valdez were married for 5 years. They dated for 6 months after getting together in 2004 and married on 10th Jul 2004. 5 years later they divorced on 11th Oct 2011.

They had a son named Santino age 15.

About

Patricio Borghetti is a 50 year old Argentinean Actor. Born Juan Patricio Borghetti Imerito on 5th December, 1973 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, he is famous for Esperanza del corazón. His zodiac sign is Sagittarius.

Grettell Valdez is a 48 year old Mexican Actress. Born Grettell Valeria Valdéz Jimenéz on 7th July, 1976 in Santiago de Querétaro, Querétaro, Mexico, she is famous for her roles as Eloisa in the Televisa telenovela Ángela, Alejandra Avellán in the Televisa/Canal de las Estrellas telenovela Por tu amor, Iris in the 2000 horror short film El duende del reloj, Edecan in the 2001 comedy film Un mundo raro, Daniela Jiménez Robles in the Televisa/Canal de las Estrellas telenovela Clase 406, Lucía Valderrama Covarrubias de Hernández in the Venevisión telenovela Angel Rebelde, Renata Lizaldi in the Televisa/Canal de las Estrellas telenovela Rebelde, Pamela Altamirano Villamil in the Televisa telenovela Heridas de amor, Carlota Santodomingo Torres Oviedo in the Televisa youth-targeted telenovela telenovela Lola, érase una vez, Melissa in the Televisa telenovela Alma de hierro, Silvana Sáenz Arroyo in the Televisa/Canal de las Estrellas telenovela Camaleones, Matilde "Mati" López in the Televisa telenovela Cuando me enamoro, Zoe Santos Trujillo de García de Alva in the Televisa telenovela Amorcito corazón, María Zamudio/Diana Flores in the Televisa telenovela Lo que la vida me robó, Virginia Prado-Castelo in the Televisa telenovela Lo imperdonable, Cassandra Santos Luna in the Televisa telenovela Las amazonas, Eva in the 2018 horror thriller drama film Sobre tus huellas, Jenny Pineda Salgado in the Las Estrellas telenovela Tenías que ser tú, and Dra. Ana Caballero in the Televisa medical drama telenovela Médicos, línea de vida in a career that spans 1997–present and 1997–present. Her zodiac sign is Cancer.

Contribute

Grettell Valdez and Patricio Borghetti - Dating, Gossip, News, Photos list. Help us build our profile of Grettell Valdez and Patricio Borghetti! Login to add information, pictures and relationships, join in discussions and get credit for your contributions.

Relationship Statistics