Sonnenallee in English dictionary

Sample sentences with "Sonnenallee"

Declension Stem

In December 1997 the connection between Neukölln and Treptower Park via Sonnenallee was reopened, enabling S4 trains to run 75% of the whole ring between Schönhauser Allee and Jungfernheide.

Take bus M41, bounf for Sonnenallee, get off at Anhalter Bahnhof (9th stop) From there take bus M29, bound for Roseneck or Wittenbergplatz.

Life in the GDR has also been the subject of several films, including Leander Haußmann's Sonnenallee (1999), Wolfgang Becker's internationally successful Good Bye, Lenin! (2003), Carsten Fiebeler's Kleinruppin forever (2004).

Two movies of his books have been released, "Helden wie wir" and "Sonnenallee".

During its history, the Sonnenallee has been known under various other names.

The Soviet advance to the city centre was along these main axes: from the south-east, along the Frankfurter Allee (ending and stopped at the Alexanderplatz); from the south along Sonnenallee ending north of the Belle-Alliance-Platz, from the south ending near the Potsdamer Platz and from the north ending near the Reichstag.

Sonnenallee 225, Neukölln, Berlin, Germany 12057 - View on map Very good 7.7

Your bookings Search hotels near Sonnenallee S-Bahn in Berlin

Sonnenallee 225, 12057, Berlin, Berlin (and vicinity)

Hotels within 0.5 kilometer of Sonnenallee S-Bahn Most booked

Hotels within 2 kilometers of Sonnenallee S-Bahn

9 people looked at this hotel in the last hour Hotels within 2 kilometers of Sonnenallee S-Bahn

Hotels within 1 mile of Sonnenallee S-Bahn

Sonnenallee 225, Neukölln, Berlin, Germany 12057 - View on map

Sonnenallee 225, Neukölln, Berlin, Germany 12057

It is no surprise then that in the triangle between Oranienstraße, Landwehrkanal and Sonnenallee there are now more cafés than supermarkets.

A wide range of hotels are available near Sonnenallee Railway Station, from the friendly AZIMUT Hotel Berlin City South to the luxurious Lion Apartments.

For registration at the Grill Academy we use the plugin bookingkit from bookingkit GmbH, Sonnenallee 223, 12059 Berlin.

Offering free WiFi and garden views, City Studio Apartment for 4, near Sonnenallee is a property located in Berlin.

Estrel Hotel is located in the southeastern part of Berlin, less than 500 meters from the metro station of Sonnenallee.

Authors