Nenad Zimonjic

On 4-6-1976 Nenad Zimonjic (nickname: Nenad) was born in Belgrade, SR Serbia, SFR Yugoslavia. He made his 7.4 million dollar fortune with French Open W, Wimbledon, US Open. The tennis player is currently single, his starsign is Gemini and he is now 48 years of age.

Nenad Zimonjic Facts & Wiki

Where does Nenad Zimonjic live? And how much money does Nenad Zimonjic earn?

Birth Date 4-6-1976 Heritage/origin Serbian Ethnicity White Religion - believes in God? Non-religious Residence He owns an apartment in Belgrade, Serbia.

Nenad Zimonjic Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Estimated Net Worth 7.4 million Dollar Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 55 Richest Actors Alive in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World Colleagues Daniel Nestor & Marcin Matkowski

Houses

Currently no houses listed.

Cars

Currently no cars listed.

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

Nenad Zimonjic: Single, Dating, Family & Friends

Who is Nenad Zimonjic dating in 2024?

Relationship status Single Sexuality Straight Partner Currently in no confirmed relationship Ex-girlfriends or ex-wives Has any kids? No

Shall the Serbian tennis player Nenad Zimonjic find love in 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Family

Names of father, mother, kids, brothers & sisters:

Leon Zimonjić (Son) Luna Zimonjić (Daughter)

Skin, Hair & Eye Color

This cool friendly talented tennis player originating from Belgrade, SR Serbia, SFR Yugoslavia has a athletic body & square face type.

Hair color Regular brown Hair type Straight Hair Length short hair Hairstyle alternative Distinct feature eye color Skin Tone/Complexion Type III: Medium skin Skin Type Normal Beard or Mustache Beard, Moustache, Eye Color Brown Does Nenad Zimonjic smoke? No, never Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers

Nenad Zimonjic - 2024 Regular brown hair & alternative hair style.

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos & Style

Nenad Zimonjic endorses clothing brands like Adidas. And wears brands like Adidas.

Height 190 cm Weight 75 kilo Clothing style sporty Favorite colors white Feet size N/A Does Nenad Zimonjic have a tattoo? NoThese 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong

The Gemini with shirtless athletic body on the beach Does Nenad Zimonjic have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of Nenad Zimonjic!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.