About the programme

The tourism industry is currently experiencing radical changes. Now, more than ever, new visions, creativity and shifting priorities are required to help transform tourism into a more sustainable industry. The Master’s programme in Tourism Studies invites students from different subject area and backgrounds to contribute with their experience and knowledge to a more sustainable future, and build a career in the tourism industry or adjacent research fields.

The programme offers in-depth courses within the field of tourism and human geography, focusing on issues relating to sustainability. As a student you take part in an interesting combination of courses, study visits and independent research. All teachers are active researchers and keep students up to date with the latest findings within their respective fields. Having completed your studies, you have a strong track record that gives you the opportunity to work in leading positions and to conduct research in a global context. After completing your studies, you have the choice of a degree in tourism or human geography.

The programme is taught in English and is offered at Campus Östersund, which is an ideal environment for studying tourism and sustainable development. Close proximity to the Swedish and Norwegian mountains means that students can easily access many of the region’s top destinations. Since the programme is linked to the ETOUR (European Tourism Research Institute), it enables students to participate in current research and develop international contacts.

Choose between One and Two-year Master’s programmes

Two-year Master’s programme (120 ECTS) is a standard international Master degree which gives you an in-depth education in the field of tourism. However, you also have a possibility to complete your studies one year early and graduate with a Master’s degree of 60 ECTS. This is made possible by exchanging the last course in the second semester (Applied Research) with a thesis project (15 ECTS). Please note that a Masters’s degree of 60 ECTS (Magister) is well-established in Sweden but might not be recognized as a full Master’s degree in some countries, where 120 ECTS are required.

The programme's link to the European Tourism Research Institute enables students to participate in current research and develop international contacts

The structure of the teaching

Lectures, discussion groups, field trips, seminars, and tutorials.

Entry requirements

A bachelor' s degree of at least 180 credits (ECTS) and English course 6/English course B from Swedish Upper Secondary School (Gymnasium) or the equivalent.

Title of qualification

Masterexamen

Masterexamen med huvudområdet turismvetenskap alternativt kulturgeografi

som översätts till

Degree of Master of Science (120 credits) with a major in Tourism Studies or Human Geography

After the programme

Our graduates can be found in several different positions, both in the public and private sectors. Our graduates work as destination planners, analysts, or in tourism services and destination development. The programme provides a basis for further studies at the graduate level. Mid Sweden University itself offers a PhD programme in tourism studies.

Work experience contact

Through this education, students are able to develop working contacts for the future with leading players in the tourism industry. The students' in-depth thesis allows them to foster interaction with the tourism sector, which can also lead to future internships or jobs.