Ostersund FK were playing in the fourth tier of Swedish football in December 2010, but one man turned their fortunes around and became a club legend.

In seven short years, this man catapulted OFK into the Swedish top flight, won domestic silverware, qualified for the Europa League, and even beat Arsenal at Emirates Stadium.

That man was, of course, Graham Potter who after moving his young family to Ostersund, known as the "Winter City" for its seemingly endless cold season, established a legacy at the club few thought possible when he took charge at the start of the decade.

The now Brighton manager left OFK in 2018, before moving onto Swansea City.

Potter managed to secure their status in the Championship amid considerable financial pressures, 16 players leaving the club and only five coming in after their Premier League relegation, before departing for the Albion in 2019.

So Sussex Live went to find out more about the legacy he left behind at the Swedish club.

‘Like a dad to me’

Sam Mensiro made the rarely-trodden path from Evesham United in Worcestershire to Ostersunds in 2011 at the age of 20 and, after a successful trial, became a key player under Potter over two spells at the club.

Having spent the majority of his professional career in Sweden, which wouldn't have been possible without Potter's initial input and guiding hand as a coach, unsurprisingly the now 31-year-old sees him as a "father figure".

The Ghanaian told Sussex Live: “For me, Graham Potter is like a dad to me. He meant a lot to me. He did a lot for me.

“He made me who I am today because he was the one that helped me to sign my first professional football contract with Ostersunds FK in 2011.

“He is a great man, a good guy, and a good friend to me as well. We still keep in touch, we always try to keep our friendship going and for me I am so happy to have him in my life.

“He is a dad to me. I always wish him well wherever he is. He is a good coach and hopefully this year they are going to do good in the Premier League.

“I am so happy that he has got this opportunity to coach in the Premier League, he is doing good.

“He is everything to me. He has done a lot for me and I will always appreciate what he did for me and my family back home in Ghana.

“So, Graham Potter. I want to say thanks a lot and I wish you well. Keep on shining, god bless you.”

‘He can see possibility in everything’

Club secretary Lasse Landin first met Potter in 2012 and he was impressed that the sub-zero temperatures didn't dampen his resolve or enthusiasm for the role.

Landin said Potter was the first coach at Ostersunds who understood the importance of the mental side of the game, as well as physical, and how he made everyone around him grow to be a better person and footballer.

He added that Potter was "world-class" and the best coach he had ever worked with.

“I first met Graham Potter in January 2012. He came to Ostersunds and it was really, really cold - minus 20C something and I was a bit confused,” he said.

“I thought maybe Graham didn’t want to be here when it is so cold.

“So I said to Graham, ‘It’s not like this every time,’ but Graham said, ‘No problem, Lasse’. ‘You know in England the sky is almost grey every day, here it’s blue sky. So it doesn’t matter if it’s cold’.

“That is a bit like how Graham is. He can see possibility in everything. He was actually the first coach that I was working with at Ostersunds who knows that a football game is also a game in your mind.

“It’s about how you think, and how you react, and how you can improve yourself in every aspect of life and Graham is enormous in that way.

"He can make every player, every member of the staff, everyone around him, he can make them grow to be a better person, to be a better human. By that, they will also be a better football player.

“Graham is probably, not probably, he is absolutely the best coach I have ever worked with. For me it is not a strange thing that he is in the Premier League now, he is world-class. He is really, really different class.”

‘It is amazing that I have been a small part of their journey to where he is now’

Bobo Sollander spent 11 years at Ostersunds, played nearly 200 games in that period, and is now a coach at the club.

The 35-year-old said Potter created something very special at the club but also in the local community too.

“For me, the most important thing that Graham did was not what he created on the football pitch was what he created around town when everyone started believing things were possible for this small northern town in Sweden,” he said.

“I think everyone for maybe two years worked around with a smile on their face, believing that everything was possible if you worked hard.

“Graham was monumental with creating that atmosphere within his coaching staff, within the group of players that we were and it spread around town and around our community.

“That was the most important thing for me was his work here. That and his incredible family. It is amazing that I have been a small part of their journey to where he is now.”

During Potter’s tenure, he got the club promoted three times, won the Svenska Cupen (2016-17), and had a win percentage of 51% in 249 games.

Legends heap praise on Potter

Leeds United head coach Marcela Bielsa was effusive in his praise for Potter while he was in charge of Swansea City, reports Wales Online.

"I know that he is an English coach that has had success in football of the north. He has new ideas, I know he’s young and I know he is admired in international football," said Bielsa.

"He’s English, he's a modern coach, he has new ideas, he brings new ideas.

"It’s very difficult to create something new in football. But it’s possible to take from the past things that we usually don’t use anymore.

“This is the difference between being modern and taking ideas from the past.”

Former Celtic and Barcelona player Henrik Larsson was also full of admiration for Potter’s coaching style.

The legendary striker went head to head with Potter while managing Swedish side Helsingborg.

“The way he is able to change his pattern of play during games is so impressive,” Larsson said to the Independent.

“I remember scouting them when I was at Helsingborg.

"They played all different kinds of systems, starting off a match one way, and then halfway through they started playing a different system, and then they ended up with a third system.

"And all the players knew exactly what they were doing.”