In conversation with Evelyn Man, an OISE alum and governor of the U of T (Hong Kong) Foundation.

After graduating from the University of Toronto, Evelyn Man (PhD 1997 OISE) returned to her native Hong Kong. There, for more than a decade, she trained English teachers at the Chinese University of Hong Kong – a position she says she found “very satisfying.” In retirement, she has served as a governor of the U of T (Hong Kong) Foundation, which offers scholarships to academically qualified students in her home city to attend U of T.

As a volunteer for U of T and a retired faculty member of another university, you must feel a bit torn between the two institutions…

Not “torn” at all. And not just two! I appreciate the opportunity to be associated with so many distinguished universities. I did my undergraduate studies at the University of Hong Kong and my master’s at the University of London Institute of Education in the U.K., where I am also quite active in the alumni association.

You sound very busy.

Yes, but I enjoy it very much.

What are you most proud of as a governor of the U of T (Hong Kong) Foundation?

Giving scholarships to students to attend university abroad. The scholarships give our students the opportunity to experience a different culture and to be exposed to different values and beliefs. Because I worked with schools during my career, I’ve helped identify qualified schools and sometimes students for the Foundation’s scholarships. Some years, I got involved in interviewing and selecting the students.

What has volunteering with U of T meant to you personally?

I’ve met many alumni from all over the world, so it’s been very good for building lasting connections. The idea of collaboration and teamwork, and of belonging to an alumni community, are extremely important to me. No individual or institution – no matter how talented or wealthy or determined they are – will go far unless they are part of a team. Through the alumni community, I’ve also been able to find great mentors, not just for me but for my students.

The idea of collaboration and teamwork, and of belonging to an alumni community, are extremely important to me. No individual or institution will go far unless they are part of a team.

The idea of collaboration and teamwork, and of belonging to an alumni community, are extremely important to me. No individual or institution will go far unless they are part of a team.

There seems to be a special relationship between Hong Kong and U of T. What effect does this have on the city and the University?

Over the years, as many as 300,000 people have come back to Hong Kong from Canada, many connected to U of T. I have friends who say, ‘My nephew is studying at U of T,’ or ‘My granddaughter is at U of T.’ This has raised the profile of the University here and given it a good reputation among Hong Kong students. Generally, people have a very good impression of Canada. It’s multicultural – and different from Hong Kong, which is fairly homogeneous. A lot of people here live in very small flats, so they appreciate the sense of space in Canada and the idea of being in tune with nature.

You mentioned Canada’s multiculturalism. U of T has made a commitment to creating a diverse and equitable campus community and it’s a key priority for our new Defy Gravity campaign. What does the idea of “inclusive excellence” mean to you?

When I arrived in Toronto, “diversity” was a relatively new concept to me. But living there for over 10 years and experiencing a multicultural learning environment where people showed a great amount of respect for each other and acceptance of different opinions benefited me greatly as an educator. Coming back to Hong Kong, I tried to spread these ideas among my own academic community. To me, “inclusive excellence” also means helping disadvantaged students achieve their full potential.

Experiencing a multicultural learning environment where people showed a great amount of respect for each other and acceptance of different opinions benefited me greatly as an educator.

Where do you keep your U of T degree?

In the drawer where I keep all my precious documents. Even though I’m retired, I sometimes bid for government projects, so they sometimes ask to see my degree. I like to keep it in a place where I can easily let them have a look.

Do you have words you live by?

If you want to go fast, then go alone. But if you want to go far, then go together. Collaboration and teamwork are very important to me.

Experiencing a multicultural learning environment where people showed a great amount of respect for each other and acceptance of different opinions benefited me greatly as an educator.

If you could go back in time to when you were just starting at U of T, what would you tell yourself?

Grab every opportunity. Expose yourself to all different kinds of learning experiences. Make new friends who are totally outside your current circle. Enjoy life at U of T and in Toronto; see what they have to offer. Have a good time – not just intellectually, but personally and socially as well.

Defy Gravity: The Campaign for the University of Toronto has a goal of achieving one million volunteer engagements by our graduates. These engagements range from mentoring, event attendance, and countless opportunities to give the gift of time to help U of T, our students, and our alumni community.

Join your fellow alumni by sharing your time and expertise with the University.

Get involved

The Campaign For the University of Toronto

9790