Improving Quality of Life

Community Health and Wellness:

Our entire Lee Gardens portfolio has been WELL Health-Safety Rated (HSR) by the International WELL Building Institute since 2021.

By incorporating community health and wellness elements, we aspire to create healthier and more supportive environments that prioritise community well-being, leading to improved overall quality of life.

For a Better Future

Environmental Sustainability Awareness:

The Urban Farm at Hysan Place rooftop remains one of Hong Kong’s best-loved environmental attractions. Each year, it hosts regular stakeholder tours for NGOs, charities and social enterprises, bringing in visitors who range from primary school children to the retired elderly.

Family and Children:

Together with leading partners, Xplore provides a variety of unique and inspiring workshops for young children at convenient venues in Causeway Bay.

For more information, please visit https://xplore.leegardens.com.hk/

The Community Lab

Having curated the Lee Gardens Community into what is today, we have been knitting these elements into a community tapestry of rich contrast and diversity. Our concentrated ownership and influence have also made these city blocks an ideal place to bring in the concept of a community lab.

Hysan partners with the Hong Kong Science and Technology Parks to setup The Community Lab, providing a unique B2B incubation platform to nurture innovative start-ups and smart city ideas. This is where new technology ventures can test and commercialise their innovations in a real-world environment to do their last mile testing. The Community Lab connects start-ups with the resources and business networks so as to provide more opportunities for start-ups to succeed and to support the Smart City Blueprint.

For more information, visit https://thecommunitylab.hk/

Lee Gardens Association

As an integral member of the Lee Gardens neighbourhood, we have joined forces with local stakeholders to enliven the community by establishing the Lee Gardens Association (LGA).

LGA aims to create a unified business community, promoting living, working, commerce, and culture to local and international visitors. LGA undertakes community events and programmes, and supports improvements to the local environment. LGA also provides a platform for retail and food and beverage services, enabling members to share views and engage government departments and the local District Council to co-create community values.

The ultimate goal of the association is to promote the sustainable growth of the Lee Gardens Area, building on the neighbourhood’s strong foundation to create new opportunities and meet future challenges.

For more information, please visit leegardensassociation.hk

Hysan Volunteering Team

Our Volunteering Team aims to promote good citizenship and strengthens the connection between our employees and the community we serve. We encourage our employees to bring along their family members to join volunteering activities, and make a greater positive contribution to society.

We support organisations and initiatives that focus on social welfare services for the elderly and young people, as well as on environmental conservation.

Lee Gardens Skateboard Fest

In November 2021, Lee Gardens Association joined Hysan Development, KELY Support Group and the All Hong Kong Skateboard Association to organise the first-ever Lee Gardens Skateboard Fest. Held on the streets of Lee Gardens Area, it featured a skateboarding competition, skateboarding experience classes, street performances and skateboard pop-up stalls. The event contributed to the vibrancy of Lee Gardens and helped to strengthen the area’s image as a fun and lively destination for everyone.

For more information, please visit event page.