The Foundation Team and Board

The Founder of the Foundation, Lena Evstafyeva started with an idea to bring music, art, entertainment, film, fashion and other creative fields together in one place and create a unique kind of Tuscan retreat. In 2013 the first creative residencies took place that offered ‘time and space’ to artists from different backgrounds, with an emphasis on collaboration and the exchange of ideas - both among the residents and with the wider community. The Foundation team and the board with their different fields of expertise reflect this multi- disciplinary approach.

Foundation Team

The Villa Lena Foundation team manage and facilitate the residency programme, curate the events and workshop programme, and look after the art collection on site. They additionally work on longer term projects that look to develop the scope, outreach, and legacy of the Foundation. Throughout the season there are a number of work placement opportunities, individuals who join the team bring different skills and experiences to the residency, please get in touch if you are interested in this role.

Lena Evstafyeva - Founder

MARIA FERNANDA BARRAZA - FOUNDATION DIRECTOR

gregorio burgio - foundation administrator

Gillian Donaldson - foundation administrator

THE VILLA LENA FOUNDATION TEAM and how we work with artists

As the concept and estate has continued to develop the Founder oversees the multi facilitated project including the hotel which in turn helps to fund the work of the Foundation.

The Villa Lena Foundation team manage and facilitate the residency programme, curate the events and workshop programme and look after the art collection on site. Alongside this they work on longer term projects that look to develop the scope and legacy of the Foundation.

The main points of contact for artists are the Foundation Manager and Foundation Assistant, who work onsite through the programme to support the running of the residency.

Foundation Board

The Foundation’s Advisory Board provide invaluable feedback during the application process and support the Foundation throughout the year.

barbara casasola - Fashion designer

caroline bourgeois - Curator

charlie porter - Journalist

rafael de cardenas - Architect

rza - Music producer and rapper

Leonardo Bigazzi - Curator