Ms. Liang (Parent of Boarding School Applicant), US

"Choosing the right consulting firm is not easy for any family. I still remember how I bumped into Rae last spring at a seminar. She made time to meet with our family the same evening. Rae has addressed our concerns not only at the beginning, but also during the whole journey. Her advices have always put us at ease. After careful comparison and consideration, we decided to go ahead with Foundation, which one year later, delivered everything they they had promised, in the most professional way.. The team consisting of experts in all areas related to boarding school application acted right away with applicant strength analysis, interview preparation and planning of campus visits in the summer. The earlier the stage, the more clueless we were, but Foundation has helped our kid to clearly understand and present his uniqueness, which is the foundation for upcoming interviews and essay preparation. Foundation also helped me to know more about every step of the process. Time flew by really quickly, and Foundation has been holding our hands with schools selection, Vericant preparation, SSAT score evaluation, continued interview preparation, school research and campus visit planning, as well as essay preparation. Along this journey, Phan, the Head Coach, poured his heart and wisdom into every lesson he taught, and every essay he inspired my child to...

Mr. Lau (Parent of International School Applicant), Hong Kong

"I know from friends that getting into an international school in Hong Kong is a difficult process. I didn’t feel comfortable in helping my daughter file the best admissions application so I chose to find a consultancy service to provide guidance. I understand that these days getting into a good school is not just about grades, and I was surprised at first that there are services that put great effort in training my daughters’ communications skills. This is what attracted me to Foundation out of all the services in Hong Kong. I was very touched by how committed everyone at Foundation was. Not only did they think about meeting the basic requirements, they also planned ahead and suggested a detailed development plan for her to become a more mature and proactive individual. I want to thank the interview training tutor in particular for his hard work. My daughter went to a local school and she didn’t have very strong English. The tutor was engaging and my daughter would talk to me in English from time to time at home nowadays. We continue to be in contact with our Foundation counselor, who calls us to check on my daughter’s progress every now and then. It is great to know that Foundation really are here for us to think about everything to...

Ms. Yamao (Parent, Boarding School Applicant), Hong Kong

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Port Regis School, UK (2012 Fall Year 7 entry) Eaglebrook School, US (2015 Fall Grade 8 entry) Peddie School, US (2017 Fall Grade 10 entry) "The campus visits were great. It’s worth going on campus visits with Foundation. They helped a lot in regards to helping manage everyone’s expectations and supported us with answering all our questions when we arrived at each school. Since we didn’t know much about the place we visited, we felt more comfortable accompanied by someone who had been before and knew what to expect. As a family we decided early on to do campus visits, otherwise we would not have been able to decide which school to choose. Paper information and actual experience are quite different. We definitely recommend seeing the schools for yourself."

D. Zhang (Student, Boarding School Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Christ School, US (2014 Fall G10 Entry) "Foundation assigned a Head Coach for me, who helped me greatly improve my interviewing and essay writing skills. My Head Coach and I were just like friends. Whenever I sought him out for advice, my problems were always solved. His constant encouragement has motivated me to be persistent in the process. Throughout the application process, the interview was my biggest fear and challenge. I was not good at presenting myself in front of strangers, thus conversing with the interviewer was an obstacle I had to overcome. I have benefited greatly from Foundation’s interview coaching service. My interview training sessions were filled with lively, rich and intriguing topics, which left a lasting impression."

E. Zou (Student, University Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled University (Entry Year & Major): Rice University, US (2013 Fall entry) "The last few days before the application deadline were very memorable to me. As Rice was my dream school, I wanted to make sure my essay was the best it could be, but since I was not confident enough with my written essays, as long as it was before the deadline, I wanted to rewrite it. I truly appreciate my teachers for their patience to guide me with my essay edits again and again. Although the process of applying to Rice was not easy and full of challenges, I was ecstatic with the result that I could finally get into my desired school!"

Mr. Lan (Parent, Boarding School Applicant), Zhongshan, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): St.Andrew's School, US (2014 Fall G9 entry) "Our head coach was not only helpful in terms of the application process, but he was able to put himself in our shoes and fully understand our perspective. He was very hardworking and did a great job communicating with us. But most important of all, he helped us relieve our emotional stress. In my opinion, Foundation is experienced, responsible and reliable, which is why I have recommended Foundation to many other parents."

Mrs. Xue (Parent of Boarding School Applicant), Beijing, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): St. Andrew's School, US (2013 Fall G9 entry) "As an admission counseling organization based in Hong Kong, Foundation has many years of experience in boarding school admission counseling. Not only do they know schools, they know Chinese and this is exactly why they are most helpful in communication between us and the schools we wanted to apply to. Unlike an agency, Foundation provides the guidance in essay writing and interview coaching to better equip and prepare children beyond the application. Our daughter Grace is rather introverted. She is very shy, and we were anxious about her ability to confidently express herself and exhibit her strengths and uniqueness in the 20-30 minutes interview. With the help of the interview training provided by Foundation’s coaches, Grace finally opened up her heart and moved beyond her fears. She started to speak fluently and confidently. The counselors at Foundation are not just doing a “job”, they try their best to understand our children. They couldn’t have done such an amazing job without tremendous communication with us and the schools. The application process can be stressful and is truly exhausting. As a parent, there were times when I was irrational and irritable. They have been very patient with me, with smiles every time I meet with them. That is...

Mrs. Zhang (Parent of International School Applicant), Shanghai, China

"Even though I was not familiar with applying to international schools, I was still surprised by the amount of paperwork needed to complete the application. To make it worse, our family was also preparing moving to Hong Kong and so had other paperwork to organise. We are so grateful that our Foundation counselor was so helpful throughout the application process and frequently reminded us what we still had to complete or submit. When we visited the campus, the admissions officer was very nice and approachable. She provided helpful information as we walked around the school. I think my child was also more at ease than we expected. However, even though the officer was very helpful, it was a lot of new information to take in. It was a great relief that our counselor came with us to help us listen in and provide additional information that applied to our particular situation. I was also impressed by the quality of training provided by Foundation. My child used to be quite quiet and nervous in front of people he didn’t know, and the interview training program that Foundation provides is one of the reasons why I chose them in the first place. I liked how the teacher was very approachable when I asked her about my child’s progress. More importantly, it seemed...

Ms. Liu (Parent, University Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Loomis Chaffee School, US (2011 Fall G9 entry) Enrolled University (Entry Year & Major): Carnegie Mellon University, US (2015 Fall entry, College of Science) "The most helpful aspect of Foundation is the 4-year education planning they provide, as well as the preparation for university application. This is particularly useful for parents like us, who do not know too much about the complete process. Foundation was able to provide crucial advice in different schools’ extracurricular activities and their signature programs. They have also played a significant role in bridging the communication between us, our child, and our target schools."

Ms. Wen (Parent, Boarding School Applicant), Guangzhou, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Garrison Forest School, US (2014 Fall G9 entry) "Due to the lack of English proficiency and professional knowledge, we didn’t know much about US schools. With the help of Foundation, we realized that our daughter will benefit more from finding the best fit instead of only focusing on school rankings. The list of schools recommended by Foundation were customized to her. Moreover, the counselor accompanied us for the US campus visits and interviews, which has helped us find the best fit school for us as parents as well. Foundation’s training has also helped my daughter to become more confident and self-disciplined. She has learned about teamwork and broadened her horizons through the experience."

Ms. Zhang (Parent of Boarding School Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): North Country School, US (2013 Fall G9 entry) Blair Academy, US (2014 Fall G9 entry) "Throughout the process of boarding school application, our counselor at Foundation was very professional, and one part we are most satisfied with was the communication between us. Foundation was very sincere and there was complete transparency in information between the school, our counselor and us. One big challenge for Chinese families in boarding school application is that we are not familiar with American boarding schools and the overall environment. Therefore, it is of grave importance that the communication between the education consultancy and the school is accurate and transparent. This can not only represent Foundation's integrity and profession, but more importantly, truly help our child to find the best fit school. We agree with the concept of "matching" a child to the best fit school, and we are very thankful to the help and recommendations Foundation has provided. They came up with a good school selection list after thorough consideration, and we are very interested in quite a few of the schools. Moreover, our counselor was able to provide a lot of soft information through their personal experiences or campus visits done by other counselors. This is extremely helpful to us in confirming our thoughts and answering our questions....

J. Tang (Student, University Applicant), Shanghai, China

Enrolled University (Entry Year & Major): Boston University, US (2016 Fall entry) "During the process, I do think the weekly conversations with counselors and teachers were really helpful. The conversations did not only improve my writing skills, made myself a better in presenting myself, and I gained so much confidence. It was a great pleasure to have someone like the counselors to lead me through the whole season. They really helped me a lot with all kind of problems and questions I had. My biggest issue while applying to college was that my testing score was not high enough. They spent lots of time with me before my SAT test going over questions that I usually make mistakes on and was confused about in the reading sections. They also taught me lots of techniques on how to deal with questions that I was not sure about the answers. Even after I was accepted to BU, the team kept in touch with me to give me suggestions on how to select courses and how to make the most my college life."

Ms. Zou (Parent of University Applicant), Guangzhou, China

"Over the past year, we were preparing for college applications with the guidance of Foundation's consultants. The most obvious change I saw in my child was that she gradually learned to respect and make choices. Also, owing to our ignorance about US schools and our daily tight schedules, we as parents were less involved and relied on Foundation to manage the process. Looking back, it may have been this relatively ordinary piece that was able to reflect her passion and persistence for design, eventually gaining the recognition from Admission Officer. So rather than trying to be too different, I think it is more important to write something that is suitable and true to yourself. Looking back, the essay training transformed our daughter's relatively ordinary piece into something that was able to reflect her passion and persistence for design, eventually gaining the recognition from Admission Officer."

A. Chen (Student, Boarding School Applicant), Guangzhou, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Westtown School, US (2015 Fall G9 entry) "I was admitted to Westtown School this year. Though it might not be particularly excellent for others, it is my favorite choice and the school that suits me the best. Under the condition of having lower standardized test sores, my interview performance significantly contributed to the admission. Catherine, my counselor at Foundation, is a careful, patient, responsible and caring person. She was meticulous during the application process, informing me about document requirements of application and emails from schools immediately – it is difficult to use Gmail in China. In order to give me more time for test preparations, she tried her best to complete basic procedures and submit additional information for me. My father, a perfectionist who seldom praises anyone, often speaks highly of Catherine. During the interview with schools, Catherine, Zion and Chris helped my parents show their appreciation to the school. It was very important. In terms of the interview, I think it’s good to be down-to-earth. Prior to the interview, Catherine practiced it with me several times and read through the school’s information. Try to be natural and confident when talking with the interviewer. Even though I don’t have outstanding standardized test scores to be proud of, I tried my best to show the...

B. Zhang (Student, Boarding School Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): North Country School, US (2013 Fall G9 entry) Blair Academy, US (2014 Fall G9 entry) "Through the process, the recommended list of schools Foundation gave us helped us gradually understand our child and find a school that matches her interests. Our counselor was able to effectively communicate with us, and we obtained a more reasonable list of schools. In the course of boarding school application, Foundation provided great help to our family given their expertise on boarding schools. The cooperation and detailed planning of the application team allowed the quick and accurate delivery of information to parents, which improved the chances of success to boarding school admissions."

S. Xue (Student, Boarding School Applicant), Shanghai, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Mercersburg Academy, US (2016 Fall G9 entry) The journey of the school interview across 6 States in the warm winter is the most memorable memory for me in the past year during the application process. And I found planning of the application with Foundation is most helpful. As for the most difficult part of application, I have to say preparing for the TOEFL and SSAT test when we have a very demanding school course load and I couldn't give up. There are no shortcuts but to keep doing. After the application process, I feel like I build up more confidence on challenging myself, and I know myself better. I think now I can cope with more works in such a pressure after this experience. If you ask me to describe my relationship with the head coach(responsible teacher), I will say it's very good. They helped me in a variety of ways in terms of English oral communication as well as interview skills. One advice I'd like to give to other students who are applying to high schools just like what I did last year, was always to be better yourself. Parents’ testimonial: We appreciated mostly that the communication between us go very sincerely and smoothly, which is the key part of the mutual trust...

T. Lan (Student, Boarding School Applicant), Zhongshan, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): St.Andrew's School, US (2014 Fall G9 entry) "I have received very good training from Foundation. The help my head coach provided has a positive, long-lasting influence on me. Not only did he focus on interview techniques, but he also helped me shape my personality, explore my strengths and potentials, and enhance my English speaking skills. After the trainings, I feel like I have become more active and humorous, as well as a better sense of what US high schools are like. My conversations with my head coach are not restricted to only school-related topics, but we include other meaningful subjects such as the NBA. I really enjoyed the whole training process, and as time went by I gradually learned more about who I am and what I want. "

Ms. Peng (Parent of Boarding School and University Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): The Webb School in TN, US (2012 Fall G10 entry) Enrolled University (Entry Year & Major): Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, US (2015 Fall Entry) "According to what I've seen, Foundation has a dedicated and professional team. Due to the fact most of the team of counselors and teachers studied and lived in the US, they are able to help Jason because they are all familiar with the application procedures. Whenever we had problems, they gave concrete, workable recommendations and we knew that we were in safe hands. With Foundation’s help, our family made it to the US and did 12 campus visits in January, 2012. Finally we were enrolled in a boarding school in Tennessee for 3 years (G10, G11, G12) after schools’ interviews and our screening. Jason graduated in May 2015, and is now ready to step into Cal Poly State University, San Luis Obispo, and explore the beauty of architecture. We signed another contract with Foundation for Jason’s university application, because our last experience with Foundation was such a pleasure, and we know that Foundation is professional and has years of successful experiences. This includes course selection recommendations and communication services with the school. I will elaborate Jason’s 3-year high school life and his university application process below. 2. US senior...

Mrs. Deng (Parent of Boarding School Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Darrow School, US (2013 Fall G9 entry) "Foundation's detailed planning was the most satisfying part throughout the boarding school application process. They were very professional in school selection, and we are very happy with the schools they recommend. Moreover, they are extremely patient and experienced with children both in communication and in coaching sessions. We and our counselor were like friends. We can talk about anything we have concerns or just thought about. Our counselor is extremely responsive when we need her/him. We communciate through phone, Skype, and WeChat. I have to say that Foundation has helped Frank a lot. Needless to say, I see great progress in Frank's oral English expression and academic essay writing. Frank has also learned about cultural habits and social manners."

Mrs. Guo (Parent of Boarding School and University Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Woodberry Forest School, US (2012 Fall G9 entry) Enrolled University (Entry Year & Major): University of California, Berkley, US (2016 Fall entry) "As April approaches, the competitive university application reaches the final stage of results release in the Untied States. The admission rate of top ranking universities are becoming lower and lower each year, but fortunately, our Stephen received several exciting offers, and chose to accept the offer by the University of California, Berkeley. Congrats! Being accepted by UC Berkeley is an acknowledgement of his good work at Woodberry Forest School. Here I must give my thanks to Foundation Global Education. It could be much more difficult when applying to American boarding school and universities if it was not with their help in planning and coaching! Foundation has helped to make this process much more smooth and encouraging! Thank you! Foundation helped us with boarding school application back then. It was such a pleasant and positive experience, and we trust them, we know them, therefore, we turned to Foundation again for our university application, hoping that Foundation could help us lead the way through the intensive academic and extra curricular activities in boarding school life. Foundation really did their amazing work! From course selection in the freshman year in senior high school, summer break...

Mrs. Chung (Parent of Boarding School Applicant), Shenzhen, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Salisbury School, US (2013 Fall G9 entry) "The most unforgettable part during our boarding school application last year, was the feeling that we need to constantly remind ourselves to calm down, get down to business, and stick to our path and long term goal that Foundation helped plan for us. I'd like to express my thankfulness to Foundation for the help and professional advice they provided throughout the whole process. Raymond has made great progress in English thanks to Foundation's coaching services in essay writing, interview preparation, and oral English training. In school selection process, Foundation helped us a lot in understanding each school's education ideals and systems, as well as the comparison and weighing between schools. I have been frequently communicating with our counselor at Foundation regarding the comprehensive assessment of Raymond's personality, hobbies, strengths, and future expectations. They were able to give very professional and sincere advice, and working together, we finally came up with a satisfactory school list that best fit Raymond's needs. I witnessed great progress in Raymond, in terms of time management and taking initiatives in his academic schedules. I could tell Raymond now has a better understanding of himself and critical thinking ability. Through Foundation's patient and planned coaching, Raymond now can truly concentrate and has a clear...

Mrs. Chen (Parent of Boarding School Applicant), Guangzhou, China

Enrolled School (Entry Year & Grade): Westtown School, US (2015 Fall G9 entry) During last summer vacation, Andy decided to attend high school overseas. He didn’t have any particular preparation for his standardized tests (TOEFL and SSAT), oral English or comprehensive English skills. Andy’s fundamental English was not very outstanding because he attended a public school in Guangzhou. We were in a hurry as we only had about six months – from last August to this January – to boost his scores in TOEFL and SSAT, enhance his English speaking and writing ability, choose boarding schools, and prepare for Vericant and final interviews. We’ve been through various difficulties, challenges and gladness throughout the journey. Fortunately, Andy got into his ideal Westtown School thanks to the responsible and professional help, guidance and encouragement from counselors at Founation. From training his oral English and English writing to the preparation of Vericant and interviews with schools, the professional know-how and strong responsibility of counselors at Foundation earned my trust. We felt that it is not only about our own effort but also the endeavor of everybody involved in the process. Catherine, Andy’s teacher and friend, showed her solicitude for him. She often communicates with us to discuss and solve problems after work or even on weekends. We were deeply touched. We would like...