HARRISON, SR.

RICHARD P.

Quietly, on March 20, 2024, age 85, in Detroit, MI. He was born on December 3, 1938, in Pittsburgh, PA. He attended the University of Pittsburgh and Lincoln University (PA). He received his Bachelor's Degree in Education. He was married to Vernetta Easley in 1963, and together they had three sons: Richard, Jr., Kenneth, and Marc. He taught elementary and middle school for the Pittsburgh Public Schools for many years. He also worked at several banking institutions. He was a dedicated member of the Omega Psi Phi fraternity. He served as an Elder at Eastminster Presbyterian Church and was a devoted family man. He was a kind and generous man and was loved by his family and many friends. He was preceded in death by his wife, Vernetta; his son, Kenneth; and his brother, Robert. He is survived by his children; his siblings, Nelson, Rozalia, and William Harrison; and his grandchildren, Todd Martin, Stephon Pete, Deborah Harrison, David Harrison, Ausha Harrison, Nirayah Harrison. Friends may call Friday, April 5, 2024, 4-8 p.m. at WHITE MEMORIAL CHAPEL, 800 Center St. at South Ave., Wilkinsburg 15221. Funeral Ceremony Saturday, April 6, 2024, 11 a.m. in the chapel. Interment Allegheny Cemetery.

Published on April 4, 2024

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of RICHARD P.How does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of RICHARD P.

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree