Harrison Surname Name Meaning, Origin, History, & Etymology

This is a baptismal or patronymic surname meaning “son of Harry”, a medieval personal (first) name popular throughout Europe and the British Isles. The first name Harry of a medieval form of the personal name Henry or Henri, a French name, and is also used as a diminutive (short form or nickname) of Harold. One source asserts the name means “estate ruler”. The French first name Henri in turn derives from the Old German name Haimric, deriving from the worlds haim (home) and ric (power). The name was introduced from France to England during the Norman Invasion of 1066 AD. The first recorded person bearing this last name was Robert Harriesone, who was documented in the Calendar of Pleas for the City of London in 1355 AD. The name Henry was born by eight English Kings. One source asserts that in England, the name was first established in Lancashire were the family held land and titles.

Spelling Variations

Common spelling variants or names with similar etymologies include Harryson, Harrisson, Harrieson,

Popularity & Geographic Distribution

The last name Harrison ranks 128th in popularity in the United Status as of the 2000 Census. The name ranks particularly high in the following seven states: Virginia, Georgia, Maryland, Alabama, South Carolina, Arkansas, and Oklahoma.

The surname Harrison frequency/commonness ranks as follows in the British Isles: England (42nd), Scotland (150th), Wales (79th), Ireland (505th) and Northern Ireland (183rd). In England, it ranks highest in Westmoreland, Derbyshire, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and Lancashire. In Scotland, the surname Harrison ranks highest in Shetland. In Wales, it ranks highest in Denbighshire. In Ireland, it ranks highest in county Sligo. In Northern Ireland, it county Down.

The name is also present throughout the remainder English speaking world: Canada (150th), New Zealand (84th), Australia (70th), and South Africa (489th).

The 1890 book Homes of Family Names by H.B. Guppy, states the following in regard to this surname: “Harris and Harrison. These names, considered together, are distributed over England and Wales. Each, however, has its own area of frequency, Harrison in the north and Harris in the south, whilst they wage a sharp contest for supremacy in the midlands, A line drawn across England through the cities of Lincoln and Chester will define the northern border of the area of Harris. This name is at present most numerous in Monmouthshire and South Wales, in the southern midland counties of Oxford, Northampton, Warwick, and Worcester, and in the west of England, especially in Cornwall and Devon. It is less frequent in the eastern portion of its area, that is to say, from Lincolnshire south to Kent Harrison is most numerous in Westmoreland, Lancashire, Yorkshire, and Lincolnshire. Further south we find it invading in numbers the area of the Harrises and fighting for the supremacy in the midland shires, victorious in some, as in those of Derby and Stafford, waging an equal contest in others, as in the county of Notts, and completely outnumbered in the advance southward into the counties of Warwick and Worcester. Pushing on, however, in greatly diminished numbers, the Harrisons have established outposts on the borders of the English Channel. In this struggle between the Harrises and the Harrisons, it is evident that the former have been worsted. The Harrises, in fact, have been entirely on the defence. Not only have they been unable to make any successful inroads into the northern territory of the Harrisons, but they have not prevented their foes from forcing a way through their ranks and reaching the south coast”.

Harrison Family Tree & Harrison Genealogy

Harrison of Caerhowel

The Harrison genealogy traces back to Robert John Harrison, Esquire of the 52nd regiment, who in 1779, married Mary, daughter and heiress of John Devereux of Cefngwernfa, and had a son with her named Robert. This Robert John Harrison was a Major in the Royal Montgomery Militia, who in 1810, married Sophia Maria, daughter of W. Ilbert of Boveringslie, and died in 1844, and had four issue with her: Robert John, Price Ilbert (Lieutenant Colonel 1st Stafford Militia), Sophia Mary (married Erasmus Saunders), and Bridget Augusta. The eldest son was Reverend Robert John Harrison of Caerhowel, in 1844, married Eliza, daughter of Reverend Devereaux Mytton of Penylan, and had two issue with her: Robert John and Elizabeth Sophia Mytton. The son Robert John Harrison, Esquire of Caerhowel, county Montgomery, was Justice of the Peace and Captain of the Royal Montgomery Militia, who was born in September 1852. In 1874, he married Charlotte Henrietta Emily, daughter of Hugh Montgomery of Grey Abbey, and had two issue with her: Hugh Robert Edward (1875) and Gwedolen Lucy Elizabeth. The Harrison Coat of Arms (mistakenly called the Harrison Family Crest) is blazoned in heraldry as follows: Azure, on a chief or, three eagles displayed sable.

Harrison of Copford

This branch of the Harrison family tree begins with General Haynes, an ancestor of this family in the female line, who lived at Copford Hall, and involved in the English Civil War. The Reverend John Harrison, of Copford Hall, was Incumbent of Faulkbourn and East Hanningfield, Essex, the son of Reverend John Harrison, who married Anne, daughter of Reverend Thomas Bernard, and had issue with her, including his heir, John Haynes. This John Haynes Harrison was an Esquire of Copford Hall, who in December of 1783, married Sarah Thomas, daughter and heiress of Reverend John Fiske, and had five issue with her: Fiske Goodeve, Revered Thomas (married Anne Tomlinson and had two sons and two daughters with her), Mary Ann, Anne Berbard, Catherine (married John Ruggles Brise in 1824), and Jane Dulcibella Eldred. He died in 1839 and was succeeded by his eldest son, Fiske Goodeve Harrison, who was born in 1793. Fiske was a Justice of the Peace who in 1826, married Jane, daughter of James Goodeve Sparrow of Gosfield Place. In 1839, he succeeded the family estates, as well as his maternal property, and assumed his mother’s surname Fiske in addition to his birth surname Harrison. He was High Sheriff and died in 1872, whereupon he was succeeded by his nephew Thomas. Thomas Haynes Harrison, Esquire of Copford Hall, Essex, was born in 1829, and succeeded his uncle in 1872. He was one of the first colonists who sailed in 1850 to Canterbury Settlements, New Zealand. The Harrison Coat of Arms (mistakenly called the Harrison Family Crest) is blazoned in heraldry as follows: Quarterly; 1st and 4th, azure, two bars ermine between six estoiles, three, two, and one, argent; 2nd and 3rd, argent, three crescents barry undee azure and gules. Crest: A stork, wings expanded argent, beaked and membered or. Motto: Ferendo et feriendo.

Harrison of Merton Hall

The Harrison lineage traces back to John Harrison, Esquire of Merton Hall, county Down, the son of Robert of Yorkshire and his wife Satah Lee, married Elizabeth, the only daughter of John Harrison, and fathered five children with her: John (of Merton Hall), James (Lieutenant Colonel Madras Horse Artillery, married Mariannae Colles), Henry (Royal Navy), Robert (Professor of Anatomy, married a daughter of Henry Cope and had issue with her), and Anne. His son and heir was John Harrison, Esquire of Merton Hall, Justice of the Peace, and Deputy Lieutenant who was born in 1790. In 1822, he married Catherine, daughter of William Thompson of Belfast, and had issue with her: Henry (married Mary Davison), John, Eliza,m and Mary Catherine. His son John Harrison was an Esquire of Merton Hall in county Down, and was born in 1852 and was Justice of the Peace and a High Sheriff in 1874. This family was seated in Merton Hall near Belfast, Ireland.

Harrison of Ramsay and Dinton

The ancestry of this line begins with Richard Harrison, who possessed lands in county Westmorland, and he married Anne Morland, with whom he had a son named Richard. Richard married Hannah, co-heiress of Thomas Bird of London, and had an only son with her named John. This Reverend John Harrison was Rector of Wrabness, who married Margaret Mary, only daughter and heiress of Reverend Maurice Gough, and he had issue with her: Reverend John, Margaret, Hannah, Mary (married Reverend Robert Marrat Miller), and Elizabeth. His son and successor was Reverend John Harrison, Vicar of Dinton in county Buckinghamshire, who was Justice of the Peace and Chaplain to the Duke of Sussex. In 1816, John married Henrietta Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Wallaston, and he fathered two daughters with her: Henrietta Euphemia and Margaret Mary. His daughter, Henrietta Euphemia, in 1846, married Actor Tindal of Manor Houses, Aylesbury, and had five children with her: Nicholas, Actor Giffard, Charles Harrison, Henrietta Diana, and Margaret Sabina.

Harrison of Scale How

The lineage of this branch of the family tree begins with Benson Harrison, Esquire of Greenbank in county Westmorland, and Water Park, county Lancaster, England, who was born in 1786 and became a Justice of the Peace and Deputy Lieutenant. In 1816, he married Louisa Lennox, daughter of Alexander Johnston, and had one daughter with her named Mary Anne (married Reverend William Dobson and had seven children with her). In 1823, he married Dorothy, daughter of Richard Wordsworth, Esquire of Whitehaven, and had issue with her: Matthew Benson (his heir), Wordsworh (of Lund, Ulverstone, married Charlotte Emily Bartlett), Benson (Major R. Westmorland Militia, married Catherine Barttlet), Richard, John Wordsworth Faber, May Ann Dobson, and Dorothy (married Reverend John Bolland). His son Matthew Benson Harrison was an Esquire of Scale How, Ambleside, Westmorland, and was a Justice of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenant, High Sheriff, and Captain of the Westmorland and Cumberland Yeomanry Cavalry. He was born in 1824 and in 1845, he married Catherine Jones, daughter of Revered George Day, and had four issue with her: Benson Day (Lieutenant 18th Hussars, married Janet Anne Lucy, daughter of Thomas Cockburn Hood of Berwick), George Day, Frederick Faber, and Catherine Day. The Harrison Coat of Arms is blazoned as follows: Azure, three demi-lions rampant or. Crest: A demi-lion rampant argent. This family was seated at Scale How, Ambleside and Leigh House, Dutchet.

Harrison of Snelton Hall

John Harrison, Esquire of Derby, England, married Juliana Saxelby and fathered three children with her: John, Anne (married James Stanton in 1801), and Juliana (married John Stanton in 1813). He later married Mary, daughter of George Almond, and had a daughter with her named Mary (who married Major George Young in 1821). His son John was an Esquire of Snelston Hall, county Derby, and was Justice of the Peace and Deputy Lieutenant and was born in 1782. In 1813, he married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Edmund Evans of Yeldersley House, and had five issue with her: John, Elizabeth, Ellen Bowyer, Juliana Bowyer (married Henry Stanton of Thelwall), and Dorothy Sarah. His son John Harrison, Esquire of Snelston Park, county Derby, was born in 1819 and succeeded his father in 1871. The Harrison Coat of Arms has the following heraldic blazon: Azure, three demi-lions or, a canton argent. Crest: A demi-lion or, supporting a chaplet of roses proper.

Harrison of Winscales and Stainburn

John Falcon, Esquire of Winscales and Stainburn, Cumberland, England, son of William Falcon and Jane Harrison (daughter of Thomas) assumed the surname Harrison by royal license in 1844 on succeeding to the estates of his maternal ancestors upon the passing of his uncle John Harrison. In 1834, he married Anne, daughter of Allison Crosthwaite, and he had a son named William. This son was William Harrison, Esq., was born in 1839 and became a Justice of the Peace. In 1866, he married Catherine, youngest daughter of Henry Jeffarson of Rothersyke, and had three daughters with her. The Harrison Coat of Arms (sometimes mistakenly called the Harrison Family Crest) is blazoned as follows: Quarterly: 1st and 4th, argent, two bars gemelles sable, between three hates courant proper, for Harrison; 2nd and 3rd, ermine two chevronels paly azure and sable between three falcons proper belled or, each holding in the beak a lure of the last, for Falcon. Crests: Upon a mount vert a stag courant regardant sable, semee of quatrefoils, attired and unglued or, holding in the mouth an arrow in bend sinister proper, for Harrison; On a fret sable, a falcon rising proper belled or, and holding in the beak a lure gold, for Falcon. Motto: Bite courageux.

Harrison of Tydd St. Mary

The lineage of this branch of the family tree begins with Robert Harrison, Esq. of Tydd St. Mary’s county Lincoln, who married Katherine, daughter of Reverend Roger Stevens, and he had a son named Joseph, who married Charlotte, daughter of Thomas Everson of Holbeach, and they had the following children together: Everson, Charles, Alfred, Frederick Adolphus, Charlotte (married John Richard Carter), and Margaret (married Captain J. King). His son and heir was Everson Harrison, Esquire of Tolethorpe Hall, county Lincoln, who was born in 1796 and became a Justice of the Peace and Deputy Lieutenant. In 1824, Everson married Matilda, only child of Francis Millns of Horncastle, and he fathered seven children with her: Charles, Francis Joseph (Lieutenant 79th Highlanders), Arthur Everson, George Alexander (Captain in 79th Highlanders, married Emily Jane Monckton), Henry Albert (Captain 24th regiment), Mary Katherine (married Henry Brouncker of Boveridge), and Elizabeth Matila. His son Charles Millns Harrison was an Esquire of Stoneley Hall in county Lincoln, England who was born in 1826. He was a Justice of the Peace for Lincoln, Northampton and Petersborough, as well as a Captain in the 79th Highlanders. In 1852, he married Belinda, daughter of Donatus O’Brien, of Tixover Grange, co. Rutland. The Harrison Arms (sometimes erroneously called the Harrison Family Shield) is blazoned in the European art of heraldry as follows: Azure, a fleur-de-lis or. Crest: An ostrich with a serpent in its mouth all proper. Motto: Deo non fortuna. This branch of the Harrison family tree was seated at Stoneley Hall near St. Neots.

Harrison of Eaglescliffe

The lineage of this branch of the Harrison family tree traces back to Thomas Harrison of Stockton-on-Tees, who died in 1870. His son was John Harrison of the same town, born in 1827, who married Sarah, daughter of William Spence of Helmsey. Their son, Sir John Harrison, 1st Baronet, was born in 1856 and became a Justice of the Peace. In 1892, Sir John married Clara Elizabeth, daughter of Jonathan Fowler of Eaglescliff, and he had issue with her: Sir John Fowler (2nd Baronet), Mabel, (married Raymond C. Taylor in 1922), and Marjorie (married Cyril E.M. Robinson in 1926). Sir John Fowler Harrison, 2nd Baronet, was born in 1899 and in 1930, married Kathleen, daughter of Robert Livingston of the Gables, and had three children with her: Judith May, John Wyndham (3rd Baronet), and Robert Colin. John W. was born in 1933 and succeeded his father in 1947. The Harrison Coat of Arms is blazoned as follows: Per chevron azure and or, in chief two demi-lions rampant of the second, and in base a lymphad sable. Crest: Upon a fernbrake a falcon rising, belled and charged on the sinister wing with a fleur-de-lis or. The family was seated at Red Cottage, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough.

Other Harrison Pedigree & Family Tree

Symon William de Hede was born in Kent, England in 1250 AD. The following is a pedigree from him.

William de Hede or William Harrison (born in Essex, England in 1293 AD)

Henry de Hede (born in Northumberland, England in 1325 AD)

Adam Harrison (born in Northumberland in 1374 AD)

Thomas Harrison (born in Northumberland in 1391 AD)

William Harrison (Northumberland, around 1415)

William had two sons: Stephen and John.

Herry de Hede Othead or Harrison was born in England in 1281 AD. He had a son named Adam Heryson of Graystock who was born in England in 1318. Adam had a son named Thomas Heryson who was born in England in 1355. He had a son named William Hereson who was born in 1397 AD. William in turn had a son named John Heryson who was born in 1440. William had three children: John Harrison of Cambridge, Thomas Harrison (Lord Mayor of York), and William Harrison.

Early American and New World Settlers

Ann Harrison was recorded as living in Virginia in February 1623.

Raphe Harrison was recorded among the dead in Virginia in 1623.

John Harrison, age 46, came to the Barbados aboard the Hopewell in February 1634.

Richard Harrison, age 15, came to Virginia aboard the America in June 1635.

John Harrison, age 30, came to Virginia aboard the Transport in July 1635.

Hugh Harrison, age 22, came to Virginia aboard the Paule of London in July 1635.

William Harrison, age 55, came to New England aboard the Pide-Cowe in July 1635.

Robert Harrison, age 32, came to Virginia aboard the Abraham of London in October 1635.

George Harrison owned 200 acres of land in the territory of Greate Weynoke.

Charles Harrison was buried in the parish of St. Michael’s in the Barbados in August 1679.

The book Genealogical Guide to the Early Settlers, mentions seven bearers of this last name:

1) Edward Harrison, Boston, brother of Reverend Thomas, came to Virginia, and by his wife Elinor, had two children: Joseph (1646) and John (1648).

2) Isaac Harrison of Hadley, in 1671, married Martha, daughter of Richard Montague, and had issue with her named Abigail and Sarah. He was killed by Indians in battle.

3) John Harrison of Salisbury, 1640, a ropemaker by trade, married Grace and had a son named John, as well as other children with wife Persis named John, Elizabeth, and Abraham.

4) John Harrison of Wethergord, a freeman of Connecticut, 1657, died in 1666. He had a large estate and had three daughters named Rebecca, Mary, and Satah. His widow Catherine was found guilty of witchcraft.

5) Mark Harrison, a memor to the General Court of Massachusetts.

6) Nicholas Harrison, Dover, 1675-1707

7) Richard Harrison and his son Richard Jr., lived in New Haven, CY in 1644. The son had the following issue: Samuel, Benjamin, John, Joseph, and Daniel. He moved to Newark, New Jersey.

Other early settlers in colonial America bearing this surname include Harmon Harrison (Jamestown, Virginia, 1607), Benjamin Harrison (Virginia 1631), Coll Harrison (Virginia 1700), Anne Harrison (New England 1718), Andrew Harrison (Virginia 1719), Ellinor Harrison (Virginia 1719), and Elir Harrison (North Carolina (or South?) in 1724).

In Canada, one of the first bearers of this last name was Francis Harrison, who came to Nova Scotia in 1750. In Australia, one of the early settlers bearing this name was William Harrison, a convict from Middlesex, England, who came aboard the Asia in 1822, settling in New South Wales (then a penal colony). In New Zealand, some of the earliest bearers came in the ship the William Bryan in 1840, named A.V. Harrison and Thomas Harrison, landing in the city of Taranki.

Early Americans Bearing the Harrison Family Crest

Charles Bolton’s American Armory (1927) contains six entry for this surname:

1) Az 3 demi-lions ramp or Crest: a demi-lion ramp arg holding a laurel branch vert. Seal on deed, Stafford Co., Va., by Col. Burr Harrison, who d. 31 July, 1722. Benjamin Harrison, Jr., used a chevron only. Wm. & Mary Quar., Jan 1894, p. 159.

2) Azure 3 demi-lions ramp couped [or] Crest: from a ducal cor [azure] a demilion [or] holding a laurel chaplet.

3) [Azure?] 3 demi-lions ramp [or?l, a crescent for diff. Motto: In omnia paratus Bookplate Jones Harrison, N. Y.

4) Gules on a chief or 3 eagles displayed of the field Crest: a talbot’s head issuing from a ducal cor. Motto: Virtus in arduis Bookplate Smith Harrison.

5) Gules [or azure] 2 bars ermine between 6 mullets 3, 2, 1. Impaling: Gules on a cross argent 5 eagles displayed [sable] (Digges). The mullet in base is missing Crest: an escallop. Denbigh Church, Warwick Co., Va. On the tomb of Mrs. Mary (Digges) Harrison, who d. in 1744. Zieber’s Heral., p. 49. Bellet’s Some Prom. Va. Fam., vol. 2, p. 487.

6) Quarterly or and argent. On a chief argent 3 eagles displayed Crest: from a ducal cor a talbot’s head ermine. Motto: Nec te quaesiverus extra Bookplate Richard Harrison, N. Y.

Crozier’s General Armory (1904) contains three entries for this name:

1) John Harrison, of Wilmington, Delaware, 1798, from London. Per fesse or and argent, an anchor sable.

2) Frank Tudor Harrison, Esquire of Catonsville, Maryland. Sable, three lozenges conjoined in fesse ermine. Crest: A demi-lion rampant proper holding in the paws a lozenge.

3) Burr Harrison of Chappawamsie, Virginia. Azure, three demi-lions rampant argent, holding a laurel branch vert.

Matthew’s American Armoury (1907) and Bluebook contains one entry for this name:

1) Nathaniel Harrison, Clerk of the Provincial Council of Virginia, died 1727. Arms: Sable, three lozenges conjoined in fesse ermine. Crest: A demi-lion rampant proper, holding in the paws a lozenge.

Mottoes

I have identified thirteen Harrison family mottoes:

1) Ferendo et feriendo (By bearing and striking)

2) Amicitia permanens et incorrupta (Friendship constant and incorruptible)

3) Deo non fortuna (By providence, not by fortune)

4) Virtus in arduis (Virtue in hard work)

5) Le culte en difficulte (something in difficulty (???))

6) Vincit qui patitur (He conquers who endures)

7) Absque virtute nihil (Nothing without virtue)

8) Vite, courageux, fier (Swift, courageous, and proud)

9) Invictus arduis (Unconquered in difficulties)

10) Victus in arduis (Conquered in difficulties, or “Their adobe is in steep places)*

11) In omnia paratus (Prepared in all things)

12) Nec te quaesiveris (Do not seek for things outside of yourself)

13) Not rashly nor with fear

*An allusion to the eagles in the family’s coat of arms

Grantees

We have two coats of arms for the Harrison surname depicted here. These two blazons are from Bernard Burke’s book The General Armory of England, Ireland, and Scotland, which was published in 1848. The bottom of this page contains the blazons, and in many instances contains some historical, geographical, and genealogical about where coat of arms was found and who bore it. People with this last name that bore an Harrison Coat of Arms (or mistakenly called the Family Crest)

1) Harrison of Penrith, Cumberland, merchant, of London, November 1613, by R. St. George.

2) Gilbert Harrison, Alderman and Sheriff of London, Esq, descended from an ancient family surnamed Hardogson, alias Harrison, within the dutchy of Brunswic, whose arms in that country are here set out, grant of new arms 17 July 1633 by Segar

3) John Harrison of London, son of William, son of John, of Smythes, county Derby, 5 May 1575, by Cooke

4) John, son of William, of Adcliffe, county Lancaster, crest granted 10 September 1616, by Segar

5) Robert, one of the Cursitors Court of Chancery, London, descended from Durham, by Segar. Azure, an eagle displayed regardant or, ducally gorged or, a chief ermine. Crest, on a cap of maintenance azured, turned up, ermine, a bird sable.

6) Thomas of the North, of Finchampsted, descended out of Cumberland , 1574, by Cooke

7) William Harrison of London, gentleman, son of Michael, Penrith, Cumberland, second son of John of Graystroke, confirmed 24 November 1607, by R. St. George

8) William, of Barlow Grange, Notts, son of William, of county Bucks., Crest 1 November 1609, by R. St. George

9) William, of Aldcliffe, county Lancashire, father to farmer of the Customs, crest 10 September , 14 Jac., 1618 (1616), by Segar

10) Thomas, Harryson, sometimes mayor of the city of York, 2 August 1592, by Knight

Notables

There are thousands of notable people with the Harrison surname. This page will mention a handful. Famous people with this last name include: 1) George Harrison (1943-2001) who was a singer, songwriter, and guitarist, born in Liverpool, England, who was the lead guitarist from the Beatles best know for her sons Here Comes the Sun, Something, Taxman, and While My Guitar Gentry Weeps, 2) George Paul Harrison, Sr. (1813-1888) who was a brigadier general in the Confederate militia, Alabama State Senator, and member of the United States House of Representatives from Alabama, 3) Benjamin Harrison (1833-1901) who was the 23rd President of the United States from 1889-1893, and previously a Senator from Indiana, born in North Bend, Ohio, 4) Benjamin Harrison V (1726-1791) who was an American politician, planer, merchant, and Founding Father who was a Member of the Virginia House of Burgesses and Continental Congress, 5th Governor of Virginia, and signer of the Declaration of Independence, 5) William Henry Harrison (1773-1841) who was the 9th President of the United States in 1831, and previously a Senator from Ohio and member of the House of Representatives from Ohio, as well as a general office in the War of 1812, 6) Arthur Leyland Harrison (1886-1918) who was an English Royal Naval officer (Lieutenant-Commander) who served in World War I and received a Victoria Cross, 7) David Howard Harrison (1843-1905) who was a farmer and physician who came the 6th Premier of Manitoba, Canada in 1887, 8) Elizabeth Harrison (1849-1927) who was an American educator and president of National Louis University, born in Athens, Kentucky, known for pioneering professional standards in teachers and promoting early childhood education, 9) Fairfax Harrison (1869-1938) who was an American businessman, lawyer, and writer, born in New York City, the son of the secretary to Jefferson Davis (President of the Confederate States of America), 10) Eric Harrison (1886-1945) who was an Australian aviator who made the nation’s first military flight and was the founder of the Royal Australian Air Force, born in Castlemaine Victoria, and served in both World Wars, and 11) Wilbert Huntington Harrison (1929-1994) who was an American singer, pianist, guitarist, and harmonica player who was involved in rhythm and blues music, born in Charlotte, North Carolina.

To receive a complete surname meaning report by PDF you can order our SURNAME MEANING PACKAGE for $129. This report is great to share with family and friends. It includes everything you see above plus any other information we can find on the specified surname. It does take approximately 10 to 15 days for us to complete this custom report.

To receive a direct lineage & coat of arms search for your specific line(s) you can order one of our GENEALOGY PACKAGES ranging in price from $249 to $999. All research is completed by a professional genealogist with over 30 years’ experience. All reports and coat of arms files are sent by email in PDF and JPG format.

Blazons & Genealogy Notes

1) (co. Essex). Az. two bars erm. betw. six estoiles or, three, two, and one. Crest—A stork, wings expanded ar. beaked and membered or.

2) (Reisby and Burton-Stath, co. Lincoln). Same Arms.

3) (Fiske-Harrison, Copford Hall, co. Essex). Quarterly, 1st and 4th, az. two bars erm. betw. six estoiles, three, two, and one ar.; 2nd and 3rd, ar. three crescents barry undee az. and gu. Crest—A stork, wings expanded ar. beaked and membered or. Motto—Ferendo et feriendo.

4) (Hurst and Finchampstead, co. Berks; granted 1620). Or, on a chief sa. three eagles displ. of the field. Crest—Out of a ducal coronet or, a talbot’s head of the last guttee de poix.

5) (Reading, co. Berks). Same Arms. Crest—Out of a ducal coronet or, a talbot’s head ppr. collared gu. Motto—Amicitia permanens et incorrupta.

6) (Linethwaite, co. Cumberland). Per pale gu. and az. an eagle displ. or, murally gorged of the first, betw. two pheons in fesse ar. a chief indented erminois. Crest—The fasces fessewise ppr. banded gu. surmounted by an anchor erect entwined by a cable all or.

7) (Snelston Hall, co. Derby). Az. three demi lions or, a canton ar. Crest—A demi lion or, supporting a chaplet of roses vert.

8) (Galligreaves Hall, Blackboume, co. Lancaster). Az. a demi lion couped betw. three pheons or. Crest—Within a wreath or and az. a talbot’s head erased of the last, collared gold. Motto—Not rashly nor with fear.

9) (Downe Hill, co. Kent). Az. two bars erm. betw. six estoiles ar. three, two, and one. Crest—A chapeau gu. turned up erm. on either side a wing expanded ar.

10) (Gouldhurst, co. Kent). Sa. three lozenges conjoined in fesse erm. Crest—A demi lion ramp. ppr. holding in the paws a lozenge erm.

11) (Atcliff, co. Lancaster, and Elkington, co. Northampton; granted 10 Sept. 1616). Or, on a cross az. five pheons of the field. Crest—An arm vested az. purfled or, cuffed ar. holding in the hand a broken dart ppr. pheoned gold. Another Crest—A snake vert entwined round a broken column ar. (another, or).

12) (Poulton-le-Fylde, co. Lancaster). Or, a cross sa. Crest—An arm embowed in armour ppr. garnished or, holding a broken spear, the head dependent ppr.

13) (Lincoln’s Inn Fields). Same Arms. Crest—An arm erect, couped below the elbow, habited az. cuffed ar. the hand holding an arrow ppr. barbed or.

14) (London; descended from Durham). Az. an eagle displ. or, ducally gorged ar. Crest—On a chapeau az. turned up and indented erm. a bird with wings endorsed sa.

15) (co. Lancaster). Or, on a cross az. four pheons or.

16) (London). Per fesse or and ar. an anchor erect in pale sa. Crest—Out of a crown or, a plume of ostrich feathers of the last and ar.

17) (London). Az. an eagle displ. or, a chief erm. Crest—On a chapeau az. turned up erm. an eagle, wings expanded, sa.

18) (London; Her. Off.). Az. an eagle displ. gorged with a ducal coronet or, a chief erm.

19) (Norton Place, co. Lincoln; quartered by Sir Montague Cholmeley, Bart., 1840). Az. on a chief or, three eagles dipl. sa.

20) (Tydd St. Mary, co. Lincoln). Az. a fleur-de-lis or. Crest—An ostrich with a serpent in its mouth. Motto—Deo non fortuna.

21) (London; confirmed to John Harrison, of London, by Cooke, Clarenceux, 6 May, 1575). Gu. an eagle displ. and chief or. Crest—A snake vert entwined round a broken column or.

22) (Newcastle). Same Arms and Crest.

23) or Haryson (co. Norfolk; granted by Barker Garter, a.d. 1549, to Rycharde Heryson, alias Ilers, of Great Plumstead, co. Norfolk). Ar. an eagle displ. sa. on a chief az. three crosses pattee fitchee or. Crest—Out of a ducal coronet or, a harpy ppr. crined sa. gorged with a laxe gold.

24) (Caister, by Yarmouth, co. Norfolk). Same as last, quartering Hargrave and Flight. Crest—Same as last. Motto—Virtus in arduis.

25) (Great Yarmouth, co. Norfolk, Melbourne, Australia, and Burgh Castle, co. Suffolk). Same Arms and Crest. Motto—Le culte en difficulte.

26) (London, and North Riding co. York; granted 1574). Or, on a chief gu. three eagles displ. of the field. Crest—Out of a ducal coronet a talbot’s head or, guttee de poix.

27) (Acastor, Caton, and Flaxby, co. York). Az. three demi lions ramp. or. Crest—A demi lion lamp. ar. holding a laurel branch vert.

28) (Greenbank, Ambleside, co. Westmoreland). Az. three demi lions ramp. or. Crest—A demi lion ramp. ar. Motto—Vincit qui patitur.

29) (Hendon, co. Middlesex, and of the City of Westminster: Bluemantle Pursuivant of Arms, 1767; Windsor Herald, 1774; Norroy King of Arms, 1784; and Clarenceux King of Arms, 1803). Az. three demi lions ramp. erased or, each crowned with an Eastern crown ar. Crest—Out of a mural crown az. a demi lion ramp. or, crowned with an Eastern crown ar. in the paws a laurel garland adorned with four damask roses ppr. Motto— Absque virtute nihil.

30) (Rogers-Harrison; exemplified to George Harrison Rogers-Harrison, Esq., Blanche Lion Pursuivant Extraordinary, now Windsor Herald). Quarterly, 1st and 4th, Harrison, az. three demi lions ramp. erased or, each crowned with an Eastern crown ar.; 2nd and 3rd, Rogers, or, three stags trippant ppr. in the centre chief point on an inescutcheon gu. a lion ramp. ar. (in allusion to his office of Blanche Lion Pursuivant). Crests—1st, Harrison: Out of a mural coronet az. a demi lion issuant or, crowned, as in the arms, and holding betw. the paws a chaplet of roses ppr.; 2nd: On a ducal coronet or, a lion ramp. ar. (also an allusion to his office); 3rd, Rogers: On a chapeau gu. turned up erm. a stag trippant ppr. gorged with a coronet of a King of Arms, therefrom a chain passing betw. the fore legs or. The following Crest was subsequently granted, in token of his maternal descent—Out of a coronet composed of trefoils gold a plume of five ostrich feathers alternately ar. and or.

31) (Rogers-Harrison, Hendon, co. Middlesex). Quarterly, 1st and 4th, az. three demi lions ramp. erased or, each crowned with an Eastern crown ar., for Harrison; 2nd and 3rd, or, a crown vallery gu. betw. three stags trippant ppr., for Rogers. Crests— 1st, Harrison: Out of a mural crown az. a demi lion ramp. or, crowned with an Eastern crown ar. in the paws a laurel garland adorned with four damask roses; 2nd, Rogers: On a crown vallery or, a stag trippant ppr. charged on the shoulder with a trefoil vert. Motto—Absque virtute nihil.

32) (Ripley, co. Surrey; granted, 31 March, 1819, to Rorert Harrison, Esq., of Ripley, and exemplified, 14 May following, to Robert Steere, second son of Lee-Steere Steere, Esq., by Sarah his wife, eldest dau. of the said Robert Harrison, Esq., who assumed, by sign manual, the surname and arms of Harrison). Per pale az. and sa. three demi lions ramp. erm. each gorged with a collar gemellee gu. Crest—A demi lion ramp. erminois erased gu. holding betw. the paws a garland of laurel ppr. encircling a mascle of the second.

33) (Winseales and Stainburn, co. Cumberland, exemplified to John Falcon, Esq., of Whitehaven, upon his assuming, by royal licence, the name of Harrison). Quarterly, 1st and 4th, ar. two bars gemelles sa. betw. three hares courant ppr., for Harrison; 2nd and 3rd, erm. two chevronels engr. paly az. and sa. betw. three falcons ppr. belled or, for Falcon. Crests—1st, Harrison: Upon a mount vert a stag courant reguard. sa. semee of quatrefoils, attired and unguled or, holding in the mouth an arrow in bend sinister ppr.; 2nd, Falcon: On a fret sa. a falcon rising ppr. belled or, and holding in the beak a lure of the last. Motto—Vite, courageux, fier.

34) (granted to William Harrison, Esq., F.S.A.). Az. a demi lion ramp. couped betw. three pheons or. Crest—A talbot’s head erased az. collared or, within a wreath gold and of the first.

35) (Fun. Ent. 1630. Peter Harrison, Cursitor and a Six Clerk in Chancery). Ar. on a chev. engr. gu. betw. three hares saliant ppr. as many bezants, a mullet for diff. Crest—A coney holding betw. the paws three ears of wheat all ppr.

36) (Reg. Ulster’s Office). Vert a lion ramp, and a chief or.

37) (confirmed by Roberts, Ulster, 1648, to William Harrison, of Dublin, Gent., descended from an ancient family in England). Ar. two bends gu. on a chief sa. an eagle displ. or. Crest—A demi eagle displ. murally gorged or.