tThe paper describes the spatangoid echinoids belonging to Macraster, which could be found in the Albiandeposits (Kazhdumi Formation) at the Anneh anticline situated in Zagros Mountains, Southwest of Iran.The aim is to re-examine, and redefine three species: M. douvillei, M. longesulcatus and M. obtritus. Dou-villaster and Macraster genera are synonymized and then the assignment of nominal Tethyan speciesbelonging to the same genera is reviewed. The substantial reduction of species does not strongly impactthe biodiversity patterns. Neither the bio-geographical provinciality nor the temporal trends of taxo-nomic richness are affected. Among the Cretaceous spatangoids, Macraster is a highly specialized taxonthat displays outstanding adaptations of the ambulacra to improve in the gaseous exchanges. This, inreturn, triggers the higher frequency of the taxon in the warm shallow waters of the Tethyan margins,and in oxygen-depleted environments.

26 species belong to 24 genera and 16 families have been described and illustrated from the Callovian Tuwaiq Mountain Limestone, Khashm Al-Qaddiyah, central Saudi Arabia. 10 of the identified species belong to scleractinian corals, 7 to brachiopods, 4 to bivalves, 4 to gastropods and one to cephalopods. Actinastraea pseudominima, Thamnasteria nicoleti, Enallocoenia crassoramosa, Collignonastraea cf. grossouvrei, Burmirhynchia jirbaensis, Pholadomya (Bucardiomya) somaliensis, Pseudomelania (Rhabdoconcha) raabi and Nautilus giganteus are believed to be recorded for the first time from the Jurassic rocks of central Arabia. The identified species have close affinity to Tethyan faunas known from parts in Asia, Africa and Europe. They indicated shoaling of the sea floor persisted throughout the deposition of the Tuwaiq Mountain Limestone, in water depth ranging from 20 to 30 m. The low diversity of invertebrates in the studied section may attribute to paleoenvironmental conditions prevailed during the Callovian age as high rate of sedimentation.

Echinoids fauna are common and distributed in the Lower Miocene deposits of the Bagher Abad area, northeast Isfahan, Central Iran.There are six Echinoid taxa belonging to the Echinoidea Class that can be described as: Clypeaster intermedius, Prinocidaris sp. andspines related to: Eucidaris zaemays, Stylocidaris Polyacantha, Spatangoid sp. and Prinocidaris sp. Bivalves, Foraminifers,Bryozoans, Brachiopods, scatter fragment of Crabs and Corals can obviously be seen in this section. The presence of Echinoids andBivalves fauna indicated that, the shallow and warm water environment was dominated by them in Central Iran at the Lower Miocene(Burdigalian). From a palaeobiogeographic point of view, the fauna from the Qom Formation were similar to the West and Centralparts of the Paratethys and confirmed that, the Bagher Abad area was located in the marginal seaways, which connected the West,Central Paratethys and Indo-pacific Ocean at that time (Lower Miocene).

Abstract Thirty echinoid species (15 regular and 15 irregular), belonging to 20 genera, are described from the Upper Cretaceous successions exposed at the Abu Darag (Northern Galala), Saint Paul, and Wadi El Dakhl sections (Southern Galala). Two new species are established : Heterosalenia dakhlensis and Phymosoma kassabi. Both are from the Coniacian of Wadi El Dakhl. The rank of the subspecies Mecaster heberti (Coquand) turonensis (Fourtau) is raised to the species level. The apical disc of the genus Pedinopsis Cotteau, 1863 is illustrated for the first time.