“Terry’s style is always direct, approachable, and pragmatic. Abstraction is hard, and visualizing abstractions is as well, but here she’ll guide you in doing both using Rational Software Architect.”

—From the Foreword by Grady Booch, IBM Fellow

Master UML 2.0 Visual Modeling with IBM Rational Software Architect

Using IBM Rational Software Architect, you can unify all aspects of software design and development. It allows you to exploit new modeling language technology to architect systems more effectively and develop them more productively.

Now, two of IBM’s leading experts have written the definitive, start-to-finish guide to UML 2-based visual modeling with Rational Software Architect. You’ll learn hands-on, using a simplified case study that’s already helped thousands of professionals master analysis, design, and implementation with IBM Rational technologies.

Renowned UML expert Terry Quatrani and J2EE/SOA evangelist Jim Palistrant walk you through visualizing all facets of system architecture at every stage of the project lifecycle. Whether you’re an architect, developer, or project manager, you’ll discover how to leverage IBM Rational’s latest innovations to optimize any project.

Coverage includes

Making the most of model-driven development with Rational Software Architect’s integrated design and development tools

Understanding visual modeling: goals, techniques, language, and processes

Beginning any visual modeling project: sound principles and best practices

Capturing and documenting functional requirements with use case models

Creating analysis models that begin to reveal your optimal system implementation

Building design models that abstract your implementation model and source code

Using implementation models to represent your system’s physical composition, from subsystems to executables and data

Transforming these models to actual running code

The IBM Press developerWorks® Series is a unique undertaking in which print books and the Web are mutually supportive. The publications in this series are complemented by resources on the developerWorks Web site on ibm.com. Icons throughout the book alert the reader to these valuable resources.