Tumi Robe Nirobe…

Today – on the 156th birth anniversary of Rabindranath Tagore – these words of the Nobel Laureate’s deeply moving song is a reminder of the continuing relevance of his poetry and other writings. He was the first Non-European to receive a Nobel Prize when in 1913, his collection of poems titled, Gitanjali was awarded the coveted prize for Literature in recognition for having “written the finest poems of an idealistic tendency”.

And yet his global reputation has not always been even.

When W.B Years, Ezra Pound and others tried to make the world aware of Tagore’s works, they heavily depended on the popularity of contemporary schools of mysticism, Theosophical Society and other spiritualist groups. This led to the image of Tagore as a Mystic of the East, the Bard who was the keeper of timeless fountains of spirituality and through his poetry was now spreading its precious waters across the world. Indeed Rabindranath’s physical appearance—handsome, bearded, dressed in Oriental robes—may, to some extent, have encouraged his being seen as a carrier of exotic wisdom. The problem with this image was that instead of encouraging people to evaluate Tagore’s works in actual literary terms, made them seem merely spiritualist, and as time went on, he and his writings began to be seen as repetitive and distant.

The truth on the other hand was that his short stories, novels, plays, essays and letters show a keen engagement with the real world. He had practical and clearly thought out views about nationalism, war and peace, cross-cultural education, freedom of the mind, the importance of rational criticism, the need for openness – and did not just concern himself with mystical and religious experiences as the West would have liked to believe.

Tagore’s essays particularly traverse a wide range of topics, beginning from literature, politics, culture, social change, religious beliefs to philosophical analysis and international relations. Co-inciding with the fiftieth anniversary of Indian independence, a selection of Tagore’s letters by Cambridge University Press was published which has helped readers and critics to rediscover Tagore’s ideas and reflections and made them extremely relevant to the modern world. Apart from being a literary genius, Tagore was a talented painter as well whose pictures, with their mixture of representation and abstraction, have started to receive the acclaim that they have long deserved.

While the rest of the world has now only started rediscovering the beauty and power of his writings, Rabindranath Tagore has always remained a towering figure in the Bengali literary tradition which goes back to more than a thousand years. Not surprisingly in 1971, the newly independent country of Bangladesh chose one of Tagore’s songs—the “Amar Sonar Bangla” which means “my golden Bengal”—as its national anthem. Tagore had already composed the music and lyrics of Jana Gana Mana or “Thou Art the Ruler of All Minds” which had been chosen as India’s national anthem way back in 1947. This makes Tagore the only poet in the world to have been the composer of the national anthems in two countries – surely as significant a measure of his lasting relevance and greatness among the authors of history as any.

– Excerpt from 20 GREATEST AUTHORS OF THE WORLD Kalyani Mookherji, Prabhat Prakashan, 2016. ISBN: 9788184303599, 8184303599

Share this:

Like Loading...

Among the few things to look forward to in the blistering summer of the Indian plains is the prospect of experiencing that most divine of fruits, mango. When ripe, the sweet fleshy fruit – depending on the variety – glows in colours ranging from emerald green to passionate crimson and can make you heady with its delicious fragrance.

Here are then 5 things that you can do with the mango:

Eat It

Before you roll your eyes at this most obvious of inputs, consider this fun fact – globally, more fresh mangoes are consumed every day than any other fruit. And if you are wondering how, truly you are spoilt for choice. Mangoes can be eaten raw in salads and salsa, cooked in curries and chutneys, pureed and used in a variety of desserts, preserved as pickles, jams and murabbas or just peeled, sliced and gobbled up whenever the fancy strikes you.

Drink it

Ways to slurp up mango can range from enjoying its sharp tartness to its heavy sweetness. Aam panna is a refreshing drink made after roasting the raw fruit and then seasoning the flesh with mint leaves and spices like freshly roasted and ground cumin. Aam ras is a thick sweet drink and usually rounds off a meal in the western part of India. There are of course the usual milk-shakes and smoothies which use the golden flesh of the mango to give the drink a delicious body but also try out mango lassi that gives a fruity spin to the popular summer yoghurt drink.

Smell it

Of course, you do that while buying mangoes from the fruit vendor but have you ever enjoyed of its fragrance outside the dining table? Mango blossoms have a distinct smell – a sort of a combination of sweet and musky. While modern perfumers – check out Mango from The Body Shop and Mangue from Sephora – have only recently began exploring the possibilities of this special fragrance, in Indian culture the aroma of mango blossoms holds a special place. In Hindu mythology, mango blossoms appear as one of the five arrows of Kama-deva or God of love while the Bengali poetic giant Rabindranath Tagore was reportedly energized by the early summer fragrance of mango blossoms to translate his Gitanjali into English, which in fact went on to win the Nobel Prize for Literature.

Paint it

The sensual appeal of the mango is further refined in the sphere of fine arts. The elongated shape of the fruit with a delicate point appears in the art world as the Paisley whose origin has been traced by design historians to India – very likely due to the fact of the country being home to this most delicious of fruits. Paisely patterns are popular in saris, shawls, scarves, carpets as well as other exotic fabrics and accessories.

Pun it

If you are exhausted by all this sensory overload, take heart from the ways the mango can lend itself to delightful puns too. Hence the commercial by a popular fruit juice brand which pitches its mango drink as Aamsutra, telling you that it probably is the next best thing to Kamasutra, the ancient Indian love manual. Finally you must have heard about Banana Republics but how about the Mango People’s Party? While the Delhi Chief Minister has his hands full already with party infighting and corruption charges, the ordinary – which actually puns with the Hindi name for the mango – people can surely use the wordplay to get some comic relief!

Share this:

Like Loading...

Today I took a road trip from Hyderabad to Bangalore – a distance of 580 km under a white-hot summer sky. As the scrublands of the Deccan dotted with flaming Gulmohar trees flew by, my thoughts wandered on the many meanings that The Road has come to acquire in language and culture.

There is the obvious one of the physical journey symbolizing earthly life – travelling along a road with its many twists and turns, crests and valleys, meetings and partings is a common metaphor for the entire course of a human life with birth as the starting point and death as the final destination. Of course for the more positive or religious among us, the latter can be conceived as entry to another world – perhaps the beginning of another metaphorical journey !

Indeed because of its symbolic richness, the road has frequently been the focus of poems, songs and movies. The old country classic “King of the Road” celebrates a life on the go, free from material and emotional baggage while the Kishore Kumar gem “Rahi tu mat ruk jana…” from the 1964 movie Door Gagan ki Chaon Mein is sure to uplift any tired sun-scorched traveller with the eventual promise of a shady green oasis.

In fact, there is an entire genre of road trip movies where the protagonist’s physical journey unfolds both as the setting and the instrument for the search for an inner purpose or spiritual meaning – or simply the attempt to preserve life, as evident from the many violent thrillers in this genre. While the Hollywood ones are too diverse to discuss here – my personal favourites are Rain Man as well as Thelma and Louise – in Bollywood, they are finally making a more frequent appearance. Dhanak, NH4, Road Movie and Finding Fanny are some that I have watched recently and liked.

For me personally, the road and all that it signifies is best evoked in the poems of Robert Frost. In “Stopping by the Woods on a Snowy Evening”, the speaker notices the beauty of the wayside but eventually heeds the call of responsibilities since:

“I have promises to keep

and miles to go before I sleep”

Even more expressive of my deepest thoughts is “The Road Not Taken”. Giving up easier options, popular choices – all this I can better relate to. It is the untrodden way that beckons me – new challenges that make me feel alive! I can almost believe that when writing about which path to take, the great American poet had my life in mind :

“I took the one less travelled by,

And that has made all the difference.”

Bon Voyage !

Share this:

Like Loading...

“…Human in their fallibility and sublime in their ambition”

These words elegantly describe the main figures of the book, Heroines: Powerful Indian Women in Myth and History. Authored by Ira Mukhoty and published by Aleph, this work of non-fiction focuses on figures as diverse as the Queen Draupadi and shepherdess Radha from mythology to the gifted courtesan Ambapalli, the courageous queen Laxmibai, influential Mughal princess Jahan Ara and the resourceful Begum Hazrat Mahal in history. The book makes a strong statement of reclaiming the stories of powerful Indian women – both from wilful forgetfulness of male historians and from bland standardization by cultural nationalists.

Backed by solid research and narrated in a fluid language, the book appealed to both the scholar and the mother in me. The author not only resurrects women historical figures like Hazrat Mahal and Jahanara Begum whose influence and contribution to running empires have conveniently been glossed over by mainstream historians but also presents barely-known facts about them – for example Hazrat Mahal’s part-African lineage and Jahanara Begum’s immense fortune as she was one of only three women to own trading ships in her time. Most significantly, the book throws these characters in relief rather than indulging in hagiographic or critical accounts that mainstream historians are wont to do. Thus we are reminded that Radha was a married woman when she pined for Krishna and that Rani Laxmibai repeatedly sought the help of British officials to protect her people, before finally taking up arms. Likewise, figures like Ambapalli and Raziya Sultan who now in popular culture are merely associated with their sexual appeal/transgressions emerge as intelligent, brave women who became game-changers, not because of how they looked, but because of their ambition and worldly wisdom.

What makes this book a success in my opinion is that it sets you thinking – why has history been a chronicle of only male kings and generals? Surely a developed civilization requires more than that…teachers, engineers, doctors, writers, artists! And what about the millions of women who silently go on with the practical business of running a home and family so that an Ashoka or a Chanakya can participate in the public domain and excel there. Indeed, we study history – but where is ‘herstory’?

And, oh by the way, this review of the book is entirely my own – no commercials here ;D

Share this:

Like Loading...

“In this Universe, teeming with life –

Amidst this plenitude,

have I found a place –

My very own space

…and it fills me with wonder !”

These words indicate my humble attempts to translate one of the most epiphanic songs written by Rabindranath Tagore, winner of 1913 Nobel Prize for Literature. In the original, the Bengali song begins as “Aakaash Bhora, Shoorjo Taara…” and as it gradually rises to a sonorous crescendo, it never ceases to inspire me with the realization that Life – with all its vicissitudes and anxieties – is a Gift to cherish and nurture. And every time I hear the song, it moves me to silently bow my head in grace and thanks to the Creator.

There is, in fact, a more direct reason for choosing the words of this classic Rabindrasangeet to launch my blog – words, books, poetry, music and being a Bengali are all facets of my identity that I am passionate about. At the same time I am keenly aware that there are so many writers out there whose blogs on these topics are perhaps more popular than mine can hope to be.

And yet – here am I…This blog is my effort to claim in this digital universe a place of my own…my very own space…!!!

Share this:

Like Loading...