The Vyas Samman Award is one of the most prestigious awards presented in the field of Hindi literature. It was introduced by the K. K Birla Foundation in the year 1991. In 2023, Gyan Chaturvedi won the 32nd Vyas Samman Award 2022 for his Novel ‘Pagalkhana’. Ram Vilas Sharma was the first person to receive this award for his book ‘Bharat ke Pracheen Bhasha Parivar aur Hindi’ in 1991. Since then it has been presented every year to recognize the outstanding contributions to the field of Hindi literature.

Winner of Vyas Samman Award 2023

Gyan Chaturvedi won the Vyas Samman 2022 in 2023 for his novel ‘Pagalkhana’, which was based on a story of Innocent common people in a heart-touching manner. He is also honoured Padma Shri in 2015 by Govt. of India.

List of Winners of Vyas Samman Award Till 2023

Since 1991, thirty two Vyas Samman Awards have been bestowed upon 32 marvellous hindi authors. List of them has been provided in the table below:

Awardee

Awardee

Work

Genre

2022

Gyan Chaturvedi

Pagalkhana

Novel

2021

Asghar Wajahat

Mahabali

Play

2020

Sharad K. Pagare

Patliputra ki Samragi

Novel

2019

Nasira Sharma

Kagaz Ki Naav

Novel

2018

Leeladhar Jagudi

Jitne Log Utne Prem

Novel

2017

Mamta Kalia

Dukkham Sukkham

Novel

2016

Surendra Verma

Kaatna shami ka vriksha padma-pankhuri ki dhar se

Poetry

2015

Sunita Jain

Kshama

Poetry

2014

Kamal Kishore Goyenka

Premchand Kee Kahaniyon Kaa Kaal Kramanusar Adhyan

Collection

2013

Vishwanath Tripathi

Vyomkesh Darvesh

Memoir

2012

Narendra Kohli

Na Bhooto Na Bhavishyati

Novel

2011

Ramdarash Mishra

Aam Ke Patte

Poetry

2010

Vishwanath Prasad Tiwari

Phir Bhi Kuch Rah Jayega

Poetry

2009

Amar Kant

Inhi Hathiyaron Se

Novel

2008

Mannu Bhandari

Ek Kahani Yah Bhi

Autobiography

2006

Parmanand Srivastava

Kavita Ki Arthaat

Poetry

2005

Chandrakanta

Katha Satisar

Novel

2004

Mridula Garg

Kath Gulab

Novel

2003

Chitra Mudgal

Anwan

Novel

2002

Kailash Vajpeyi

Prithvi Ka Krishna Paksh

Essay

2001

Ramesh Chandra Shah

Aalochana ka paksh

Essay

2000

Giriraj Kishore

Pehla Girimitya

Novel

1999

Sri Lal Sukla

Bisarampur Ka Sant

Novel

1998

Govind Mishra

Paanch Aanganon wala Ghar

Novel

1997

Kedarnath Singh

Uttar Kabir Tatha Anya Kavitaen

Poetry

1996

Ramswarup Chaturvedi

Hindi Sahitya aur Samvedna ka Vikas

Essay

1995

Kunwar Narayan

Koi Dusra Nahin

Poetry

1994

Dharamvir Bharati

Sapna Abhi Bhi

Poetry

1993

Girija Kumar Mathur

Main Waqt ke Hoon Samane

Poetry

1992

Shiv Prasaad Singh

Neela Chand

Novel

1991

Ram Vilas Sharma

Bharat ke Pracheen bhasha parivar aur Hindi

Essay

What is the Vyas Samman Award?

The Vyas Samman Award is a prestigious literary honor presented annually to recognize outstanding contributions to the field of Hindi literature. It is considered to be the second-highest literary honor in India after the Jnanpith Award. The Vyas Samman is named after Maharshi Vedvyas, the author of the great Indian epic Mahabharata. This award rewards the winner with prize money of 4 lakhs, a citation, and a memento, symbolizing the cultural and literary richness it aims to celebrate.

First Winner of Vyas Samman Award

Dr. Ramvilas Sharma won the Vyas Samman 1991 for his essay ‘Bharat ke Pracheen bhasha parivar aur Hindi’. He also won Sahitya Akademi Award for his excelent work in ‘Nirala ki Sahitya Sadhana’.

The Vyas Samman, which was created to recognize and promote excellence in Hindi literature, has grown to become a symbol of hope for literary enthusiasts. It not only honors the existing Hindi writers but also encourages the young generation to step ahead and make contribution to bring Hindi literature to new levels.

Eligibility For The Vyas Samman Award

The Vyas Samman award covers a wide spectrum of literary genres. It includes novels, poetry, essays, and historical studies, ensuring the acknowledgment of diverse forms of literary expression. Any author who has his original work published in Hindi within the last ten years can be considered for the Vyas Samman Award. All the works that have been nominated for the award undergo rigorous evaluation by a distinguished panel of judges who carefully assess the works before deciding on the recipient of the award for a given year. Ideally, the judgement is made on the basis of innovation, creativity, and overall impact of the work on the social and cultural lanscape of India. It is imporatnt to note that any author who had already received the award once will not be considered for the nominations again.

FAQs on The Vyas Samman Award Winners 2023

1. Who received the recent Vyaas Samman Award?

The recent Vyaas Samman award was given to Padma Shri Gyan Chaturvedi for his satirical novel, Pagalkana. He is the 32nd Awardee to receive this prestigious honour.

2. Does K. K birla foundation give away any other literary awards like Vyaas Samman?

Yes, KK birla foundation also gives away Saraswati Samman Award annually to recognize outstanding literary works in any Indian language. Harivanshrai Bacchan was the first recipient of Saraswati Samman Award in 1991.

3. Are Vyas Samman Award and Maharshi Badrayan Vyas Samman Award same?

No, the Vyas Samman Award and Maharshi Badrayan Vyas Samman Award are distinct honors. The Vyas Samman acknowledges exceptional contributions to Hindi literature. On the other hand, the Maharshi Badrayan Vyas Samman is a presidential award that recognizes significant academic achievements in Sanskrit, Arabic, Kannada, Malayalam, Oriya, Pali, Persian, Prakrit and the Telugu language.

4. What are literary awards in India given for Hindi literature other than Vyas Samman?

In addition to the Vyas Samman Award, other prominent literary awards in India recognizing achievements in Hindi literature include the Sahitya Akademi Award, Hindi Academy Award, and Bharatiya Jnanpith Navlekhan Award.

5. Is the eligibility criteria for receiving Jnanpith Award is same as that of Vyas Samman Award?

No, the eligibility criteria for receiving the Jnanpith Award and the Vyas Samman Award are different. The Jnanpith Award is bestowed for a lifetime contribution to literature and spans all official Indian languages. Whereas, the Vyas Samman Award is given specifically for an exceptional literary work in the Hindi language published within the last decade.