Faiz Ahmad Faiz was born on 13th of February 1911. A left wing revolutionary, socialist, educator, writer, army officer and what not. In the footsteps of Sir Syed Ahmed Khan, Faiz was admitted into Scotch mission school for primary education. Later on he joined the Murray College, Sialkot for intermediate. Faiz was always fond of literature and poetry, following that he joined the Government College University and completed his BA honors in English literature. In the same year he went on to pass his post-graduate degree of Masters in Arabic for Punjab University’s Oriental College.

In 1935 Faiz joined the faculty of Muhammedan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh, serving as a lecturer in English and British literature. Later in 1937, Faiz moved to Lahore to reunite with his family after accepting the professorship at the Hailey College of Commerce, initially teaching introductory courses on economics and commerce. During the midst of World War II, he enrolled in the British Indian Army in 1942. He was commissioned and attained the rank of Captain. Faiz served with the unit led by Akbar Khan, a left-wing general. Although, he was kept out of World War II war operations, Faiz was given a desk assignment when he joined the Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) in New Delhi. In 1943, Faiz was promoted to Major rank, and then Lieutenant-Colonel in 1944. In 1947, Faiz opted for the newly established State of Pakistan. However, after witnessing the 1947 Kashmir war with India, Faiz decided to leave the army and submitted his resignation in 1947.

Faiz was a well-known communist in the country and had been long associated with the Communist Party of Pakistan, which he founded in 1947 along with Marxist Sajjad Zaheer and Jalaludin Abdur Rahim. Faiz had his first exposure to socialism and communism before the independence of State of Pakistan which he thought was consistent with his progressive thinking. Faiz had long associated ties with the Soviet Union, a friendship with atheist country that later honoured him with high award. Even after his death, the Russian government honoured him by calling him “our poet” to many Russians. However his popularity was waned in Bangladesh after 1971 when Dhaka did not win much support for him. Faiz and other pro-communists had no political role in the country, despite their academic brilliance.

Although Faiz was a not a hardcore or far-left communist, he spent most of the 1950s and 1960s promoting the cause of communism in Pakistan. During the time when Faiz was editor of the Pakistan Times, one of the leading newspapers of the 1950s, he lent editorial support to the party. He was also involved in the circle lending support to military personnel (e.g. Major General Akbar Khan). His involvement with the party and Major General Akbar Khan’s coup plan led to his imprisonment later.

Faiz Ahmed Faiz’s poetry reached high marks, let its subject be romance or socialism. He was greatly admired by the people and is one of the few writers who were valued during their life. Faiz was luckily one of them. The Poem found below is a unique one as it shifts from romance to socialism, in a way everyone loves.

Translation:

My love, do not ask from me

the love we shared once before.

If you were here, I always thought

life would shine, eternally.

We share our grief, so why argue

over the sorrows of the world?

Your countenance is the assurance

of perennial spring, everywhere.

For what is the worth of this world

but the sight of your eyes?

If only I found you, the fates

would be enthralled.

This wasn’t how it should have been,

except that I wanted it to be;

there are more sorrows in this world

beyond the anguish of love.

There is more to happiness

than the relief of reunion;

the blight of dark magic

of years beyond counting,

while draped in silk,

satin and brocade; everywhere,

in alleys and marketplaces,

young flesh is up for sale.

Dragged in the dirt,

bathed in blood, bodies

emerge from furnaces

of pestilence.

Pus flows untapped

from leaking ulcers.

My eyes can’t look away,

what should I do?

Your beauty still allures, but

what can I do?

There are sorrows in this world

beyond the pleasures of love.

There is more to happiness

than the relief of reunion;

so my love, do not ask from me

the love we shared once before

Faiz’s struggle for socialism went in vain but his love for humanity is still alive.