Faiz Ahmad Faiz was considered on 13 February 1911 in Sialkot, India, which is right now part of Pakistan, He was an educator, a military official, an essayist, a trade unionist,

He 'd had supported youthfulness as the offspring of wealthy landowners Sultan Fatima and Sultan Muhammad Khan.

His father was a lofty lawful instructor and a person from a convincing aesthetic circle that included Allama Iqbal, Pakistan's national craftsman.

Faiz Ahmad Faiz was a dynamic and Marxist essayist.

Faiz Ahmed Faiz was conceded with Lenin Peace Prize by the Soviet Union in 1962 and appointed for Nobel Prize in Literature.

Faiz ( Faiz Ahmad Faiz ) continued to learn at Government College and he got a Bachelor's capability in Arabic, trailed by an advanced education in English, from the Government

School in Lahore in 1932, and later got a second advanced education in Arabic from the Oriental College in Lahore. He in like manner served in the British Indian Army.

Faiz's theoretical work was definitively seen after death when he was given the most raised basic prize by the Pakistani government, Nishan-e-Imtiaz, in 1990. Faiz Ahmed Faiz became distributer of

The Pakistan Times and a person from driving the Communist Party part

Faiz 's early works had been standard, upbeat treatises on love andaesthetics, yet he started connecting into administrative issues, culture, and the topical interconnectedness he figured was key to

Faiz Ahmed Faiz started an indicating livelihood at the Amritsar M.A.O.

School, and thereafter at the Lahore Hailey College of Commerce.

The production of a Marxist essayist

It was 1934–35. Threatening to British, or nationalistic inclination, the aching for a chance, to free the country of the untouchable, was any place perceptible all around. So was, grievously, the tendency of "normal" conflict between the two essential systems of Hindus and Muslims. Left-wing thought was making its quality felt, yet it was regularly one close to the next with the nationalist fight and was mixed in with it, not a pariah to it. The Communist Party of India had been set up in 1925, nonetheless, its character was every now and again identical to the Indian National Congress, the essential ideological gathering in the country around at that point.

Before long, life in Amritsar hurried to a sweet, slow tenor, and the energetic Faiz could appreciate discussion and conversation with his young partners, read insatiably and structure refrain. The custom of the mushaira was strong and the section was at the same time something of an open endeavour around at that point. For sure, even Iqbal, whose stanza was philosophical and complex, was as much an open figure in the Amritsar of the 1930s as any major political pioneer like Mahatma Gandhi.

In 1979, Faiz Ahmed Faiz fled Pakistan in the wake of getting mindful of the reports that the demise of Bhutto had happened.

Faiz hid in Beirut, Lebanon, where he circulated the Soviet-bolstered journal Lotus yet returned to Pakistan in wiped out prosperity following the erupt of the Lebanon War in 1982.

In 1984, Faiz Ahmad Faiz passed on in Lahore, Punjab Province, not long in the wake of finding that he had been recommended for the Nobel Prize in Literature.