Soilleux is one of 13 members currently with the travelling party.

And he is pleased and proud to have secured his place.

“I’m very pleased and honoured to get the call-up,” said Soilleux.

“I’ve applied for a few tours before so it was good to get the call-up for this one. The MCC is made up of around 3,000 playing members so I’m very lucky to have been selected to go on a tour.”

In order to gain selection, Soilleux had to submit an application to the MCC, whose committee then processed the applications to select the squad.

And, having been given the nod, Soilleux is now in for a hectic time.

“There’s 13 of us on this one, including a first class umpire and tour manager, and we were initially due to play seven matches in 12 days,” said Soilleux.

“It was due to be a combination of T20 and 50 over games, but we’ve also already squeezed in another two 10 over games against the national side.

“They love their cricket over here and would probably play us every day if they could but we’ve a relatively small squad so we’ve got to be careful not to burn out as it’s very hot and humid here.”

However, Soilleux is relishing the variety of matches.

“The games are against either the Sierra Leonean under-19 side or the full national side but they seem to be rotating their teams to give all their squad a run out,” said Soilleux.

“It’s a once in a lifetime experience and it’s been brilliant so far.”

And Soilleux has been overwhelmed by the welcome the MCC squad have received.

“Sierra Leone is the sixth poorest country in the world and has had it’s problems in recent years, but the welcome and hospitality we’ve received from the Sierra Leone Cricket Association and the locals has been fantastic,” he said.

“They’re really excited to have us and have looked after us very well so far.

“While we have a strong squad and all naturally play to win, this tour is more about sharing our experience of the game and helping to grow it here in Sierra Leone.

“We also want to bring people together here through the game of cricket.”