The hosts looked like they were on course to claim victory but lost out on the last ball in a thrilling finish, at Castle Park.

Hadleigh won the toss and elected to bat first, with Colchester's bowlers making good inroads early on.

The returning Ben Stephens (2-42) claimed the wickets of both of the visitors' opening batsmen, leaving them on nine for two.

However, a third-wicket partnership of 72 between Samuel Handley (31) and Adam Forbes (49) got Hadleigh back on solid ground.

Runs continued to flow for Hadleigh after that, with Adam Soilleux hitting 44 in 57 balls

Soilleux enjoyed profitable 47-run and 33-run partnerships with Oliver Smith (17) and Handley, to help the visitors maintain their momentum.

Soilleux was eventually removed by youngster Oliver Allison, who recorded excellent figures of 3-21 in his five overs.

Vikas Agarwal, Dan Thacker, Charlie Fernandes and Joe MacGregor also claimed wickets, for Colchester.

Hadleigh and Thundersley eventually finished on 219 for nine, in their 45 overs.

Colchester's batsmen were looking to make a solid start in reply, as they chased 220 to win.

Opener MacGregor (48) was in good form again as were fellow top-order batters Guy Haines (44) and Simon Fernandes (44), as the hosts reached 130 for four.

But wickets fell quite regularly after that, with only Dan Thacker joining them in making it to double figures.

Thacker made an unbeaten 43 off 39 balls and looked like he was helping to steer the hosts to a narrow victory.

They needed four runs to win off the final ball but Agarwal was unfortunately run out chasing the winning runs, as Colchester lost out.

Colchester are back in action this weekend when they visit Wanstead and Snaresbrook, in their latest premier division match.

Colchester's second XI claimed a comprehensive 134-run win over Wickford, in their latest Second XI division one match.

After being put into bat by their hosts, Keir Young's side made 212 for eight in their 40 overs.

Oliver Hills top-scored for Colchester with 75 off 62 balls, while George Offord was unbeaten on 61.

Colchester's attack made light work of the Wickford top order, leaving the hosts on 11 for five,

Only two of the home side's batsmen managed to make it into double figures, as they were dismissed for 78 within 18 overs.

Oliver Hills (3-8) and Archie Sprott (3-24) did much of the damage, with Oscar Baker (2-23) and Michael Griffin (1-7) also claiming wickets.

Colchester II host Upminster at Castle Park, on Saturday.