KENNON, HON. JOHN W., One of the well-known and honored names in Belmont County, Ohio, is that of Kennon, representing large landed interests as well as social and political prominence. A most worthy and esteemed member of this family is found in Hon. John W. Kennon, who resides upon a fine estate within one mile of the city of Barnesville.

The birth of Mr. Kennon occurred in Ireland, in 1812, a year of historic interest in the annals of America, and was one of a family of seven children born to Newall and Jane (Wilson) Kennon, the latter of whom died in her native Ireland, in 1819. In 1821, the father of our subject, with his seven motherless children, left his excellent farm in Ireland, where he had prospered as long as he had been cheered and supported by the presence of his devoted wife; emigrating to America, he made his first permanent settlement in Warren township, Belmont County, Ohio, where he purchased 1,000 acres of land, paying for this large tract the sum of $10,000. In those early days the land was yet covered with its virgin growth of timber. In order to have the land quickly cleared and put under cultivation, Mr. Kennon hired various parties to undertake this business, leasing to each for seven years, free of charge, the contract being that they were to clear 21 acres. A man of excellent business faculty, he lived to see many changes wrought by his plans. He died in 1863, at the advanced age of 91 years.

John W. Kennon grew to the age of eight years in his native county, Down, Ireland, at that age accompanying his father to America. His education was obtained in an old log school house near his home, in company with the children of other pioneer families, and he was reared to agricultural pursuits, for which he has never lost a taste. At the beginning of the Grange movement, he became interested and during his later legislative career furthered in every way in his power those laws tending to be of advantage to the farming community. Successfully operating a large estate, he also became a leader in public matters and on more than one occasion, on account of the reliability of his character, was selected to serve as a United States juror, at Cincinnati. During the winters of 1868 and 1869, he served as a Representative in the State Legislature, and he was appointed one of the committee to select the site of the State Reform School for Girls, the same being now a credit to White Sulphur Springs, Delaware County, Ohio.

On November 7, 1851, Mr. Kennon was united in marriage with Eliza DuBois, and ten children were born to this union, as follows: Jane W., Josephine, Mary E., J. Newall, Agnes, Thomas J., William H., Anna E., Robert R., and George W., the two last named being deceased. Mary E. married Daniel Crawford, who died in February, 1884. Josephine married E.T. Parker, who died in February, 1896. Agnes married John C. Buchanan. Anna E. married Frank J. Beaston, a manufacturer of Philadelphia. Thomas J. married Clara M. Beaston of Philadelphia where they reside. William H. married Zetta Eccleston, and they reside in Cleveland. J. Newall resides with his aged parents. In 1875, Mr. Kennon erected a handsome residence on his estate just one mile north of Barnesville. A discovery of oil was made on his farm, resulting in a productive well and the drilling of a second, this also promising to be satisfactory. Mr. Kennon and family belong to the Presbyterian Church. He is most highly regarded in this vicinity as not only one of the most substantial but also as one of the most upright and public-spirited citizens of Belmont County. [Source: "Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KENNON, Wilson S., attorney-at-law, was born May 15, 1826, at St. Clairsville, a son of William Kennon. He was educated in his native town and at Bethany College, read law with his father, was admitted to the bar and practiced law until the outbreak of the Civil War. In 1861 he was made the Union candidate and was elected to the Legislature. In 1862 he was appointed by Governor Todd, Secretary of State. In 1863, Secretary of War Stanton appointed him paymaster in the army, in which capacity he served four years. Upon his resignation being accepted, he removed to Cincinnati and there entered upon the practice of law with Judge Okey and Milton Saylor. Mr. Kennon remained in that city until 1871, returning then to his native place on account of his father's illness. He was elected and served from 1874 to 1878 as prosecuting attorney. His death occurred in June, 1897.

Ellis E. Kennon, the second son of Hon. William Kennon, was born in St. Clairsville, in April, 1830. He received a liberal education at Bethany College, Virginia, studied law with his father and completed his course with Hon. Hugh J. Jewett and was admitted to the bar in 1854. In November, 1855, he married Eleanor M. Sutton and his one daughter is Mrs. Matthew Clark Mitchell, of Martin's Ferry. During the Civil War, he was made adjutant of the 98th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., and at the battle of Perryville, where he was performing the duties of acting adjutant general, he distinguished himself as a true and courageous soldier. The death of Ellis E. Kennon occurred in June, 1878, while he was yet in the prime of life. His reputation was that of one of the leading lawyers at the bar of Belmont County. [Source: "Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KEPLER Family : Our Elusive KEPLER Family: The surname Kepler has several variations that appear historical records. The most common variation is appear to be Keplar; Keppler; Kepner; Capler; and Kessler. I suspect that there are many, many other variations as well. The first Keplers found in government records show up in 1790 on the United States of America on the first United States Census. Records of the KEPLER surname are also found in the Pennsylvania archives in that several Keplers served in the American Revolutionary War, prior to the census. These Keplers were located in the states of Maryland and Pennsylvania. The KEPLER surname is found in these counties in Pennsylvania: Bedford, Bucks, Cumberland, Centre County, Crawford, Northampton, Philadelphia, Schykill County, Somerset, and Washington, and possibly others. Some of these Pennsylvania KEPLERs migrated to Ohio and we find them in the Census as early as 1830 living in Columbia, Delaware, Fayette, Highland, Knox, Muskingum, Ross, Stark, Vinton and Warren Counties, and very possibly even other counties. My KEPLER line, as far back as I have been able to trace at present begins with my GGG-Grandfather, Jacob KEPLER born about 1820 living in Muskingum County, Ohio before the 1840 census. We also find on the 1840 census two other Keplers mentioned besides Jacob living in Muskingum County, namely a David and Jno (John) KEPLER possibly all brothers or father & brother to my Jacob Kepler, at his time we are still searching for a possible relationship. On December 21, 1839 Jacob Kepler married in Muskingum County, Ohio Hannah Livengood who was born about 1820, the daughter of Rosanah Livengood, and unknown at the present, and to this union 7 children were born: Elizabeth b. abt 1841 married Joseph Haines on December 09, 1864. At the present we know of 1 child born of this union a son, William. James K. P. b. abt 1843. James fought in the Civil War and was a private in Company C 53rd Indiana Volunteer Infantry, and was 18 years old at time of his enlistment. James died from disease in April 1862 at the Military Hospital #1, near Savannah, Tennessee; it is unknown at this time where he is buried. The Commander of Company C was Captain James Townsend of Grandview, Indiana, cause of death not listed. Mary b. abt 1847 married Richard Newland on October 30, 1868 in Ross County Ohio, and 4 children were born to this union. Sarah married on 3 July 1896 James Baker one child Delia; James married before 1901 Mary Robbins, children: Raymond & Trixey; Florence nothing known; Raymond married before 1904 Euphemia Rhodella Hardy. Children: Graydon Randolph, Vivian Arbutus, Gerald Alwin, Ethan James, Ray Quincy Nicholas Nathan b. abt 1851 nothing known. Emery Hall (Oliver/Ohl/Haml) b. December 27, 1854 married Martha Ann Newland on October 10, 1875. Nine children were born to this couple. Raymond married before 1904 Euphemia Rhodella Hardy; Rebecca married Jacob Crites September 8, 1894; Daniel (nothing known); Sarah Ellen married Jacob Andrew Jett January 12, 1898; Thomas Aaron married Gertrude Belle Potts on August 1, 1906 Ross county, OH.; Mary Faye married Leslie Morris on Sept. 10, 1908 in Ross County, OH.; Harriett married Arthur Lightle on May 31, 1907 in Ross County OH.; Fannie Mae married Carey Murphy before 1913 in Ross County OH.; Jacob Randolph married Gertrude Irene Ford on March 29, 1920 in Ross Co. OH.; and Ines (nothing known). Jobe Dibber b. December 25, 1857 married on September 01, 1876 in Ross County Ohio #1. Ellen McCoy (no issue from this union), married October 29, 1903 also in Ross County #2. Mary Katherleen Penwell. Ten children were born to Jobe & Mary namely Sam, Mary Ann, Jacob Clifford, Leslie J, Lester, Emmet, Nancy Belle, Cora Marie, Melissa,& Ulis. Amanda Sarah Caroline Kepler b. May 28, 1861 married Aaron McCoy in Ross county Ohio on September 07, 1876 and 9 children were born to this union namely: Minnie, Sallie, Clara, Claude, William, Bert, Renix, Hazel Mae, Clifford Curtis. Amanda married #2. James Jett on December 28, 1902 in Highland County, Ohio and 4 sons were born from this union. Clarency, Howard, Raymond, Ervel in the 1840 Muskingum County census we find Jacob Kepler living above Rosanah Livengood, Hannah's mother living alone. Jacob purchased land in 1842 along the Watershed Muskingum River, 2N Range 10W, Section 13. In the 1850 and 1860 Census we find this family of KEPLERs living in Jackson County Ohio and sometime after the 1860 census this family had migrated on to Spencer Co. Indiana where on Dec 2, 1861 Jacob enlisted in the C53rd Indiana Infantry and served in the Civil War as a private, along with his son James K. P. Kepler and they served under General Townsend. Jacob pension file states that he was 44 years old at the time of his enlistment, and a farmer; and describes him as being five feet, eight inches tall, with blue eyes, dark hair and a fair complexion. Jacob died 19 August 1862 in camp near Memphis, Tennessee from disease. He was buried in the Mississippi River National Cemetery (now called the Memphis National Cemetery), Shelby County, Tennessee. When Jacob Kepler died, he left a wife, Hannah Livingood Kepler in Grandview, Indiana with seven children to care for. Hannah Kepler appeared in Court on Nov. 13, 1863 where she applied for Jacob's Pension and with her is aDaniel LIVENGOOD (at this time relationship has not been determined). Hannah bought and sold property in Spencer Co., Indiana during the years 1863 and 1864, and Elizabeth, Jacob and Hannah's eldest child was married in Spencer County, Indiana in 1864. This family's next migration pattern finds them back in Ohio, by 1868 living in Ross and Vinton Counties. Three of Jacob & Hannah's children were married in Ross County Ohio between 1868 and 1876, namely, Emery Hall, Jobe Dibber, and Amanda Sarah Caroline Kepler. Hannah after 1876 moved on to Manton, Wexford County, Michigan and died there on the 25th day of November 1879. At this time it is not known where she is buried. We know that some of her children had moved there with her, as we find Jobe living in Wexford Michigan in the 1880 Census, and we also know that Amanda Kepler/McCoy gave birth to one of her children in 1887 in Manton, Wexford County, Michigan. Jobe and Amanda Kepler by 1888 were back in Ohio with this KEPLER family even more spread out at this time living in Ross, Highland, Pike, Greene and also in Fayette Counties. Jobe and Emery died in Ross County Ohio, and Amanda died in Fayette County Ohio in the early to mid 1900s. In conclusion from that very first KEPLER who arrived in the New World before 1790 the KEPLER Family has spread out across the United States of America, and Keplers are now found in states from Maine to California, and everywhere in between. One way this family tries to stay in touch with these elusive Kepler decendants is through our KEPLER Internet websites, e-mail and our yearly family reunion. Our Kepler Family Websites Georgeanna Hallemann - Coordinator of the Kepler Reunion

KERN, Austin Roy : Austin Roy Kern, a grocer of Meyersdale, Somerset county, Pennsylvania, was born in Blain, Perry county, August 28, 1874, son of Simon P. and Olivia (Shaeffer) Kern, and grandson of David Kern. Simon P. Kern was born in 1846 in Duboyne township, Perry county, and was for eight or nine years engaged as a school teacher, but subsequently occupied himself in the mercantile business. He was justice of the peace of Perry county for twenty years, and also served as school director and councilman. He married, in 1872, Olivia, the daughter of Daniel Schaeffer, who was county commissioner of Perry county. The following named were the children born of this union: Austin Roy, of whom later; Fred Alvin, born 1876; Clyde Campbell, Frank Shaeffer, and Grace Viola.

Austin Roy Kern received his initial education in the public schools, which he attended until he was twenty-one years of age, and later attended the normal school at Millersville for two terms, and one term at Lock Haven. He then engaged in school teaching for three years, spending two terms in Blain and one term in Duboyne township. Mr. Kern then entered into the mercantile business in Dawson, Fayette county, and in 1899 located in Meyersdale, where he opened the "Racket Store," on Center street. In 1902 he sold out this business and engaged in the grocery business, having his store on the south side, but now in the center of town. Mr. Kern is a thorough-going, capable business man, and has met with good success in his business career. He married, August 16, 1899, Sarah Florence Rickard, a daughter of J. C. Rickard, of Blain, Pennsylvania, and they have two children, viz.: Emil Rickard, born January 12, 1901; and James Simon, June 30, 1902." History of Bedford and Somerset Counties, Pennsylvania" Bedford County by E. Howard Blackburn; Somerset County by William H. Welfley; v.3, Pub. The Lewis Publishing Company, New York/Chicago 1906, pg. 182/3

KERN, GEORGE, who has been secretary of the Belmont Savings & Loan Company of Bellaire, Ohio, for the past three years, was born in the Rhine section of Germany, in 1837. In 1853, when still a lad, he immigrated to America, intent upon making a career for himself. A short time was spent in Baltimore, Maryland, and then the young man made his way to Wheeling, (West) Virginia, and two years later located in Benwood, where he followed the trade of baker until he came to Bellaire, in 1856, engaging in the same business until 1885.

Mr. Kern then embarked in a confectionery business and continued in the same until he accepted his present responsible position as secretary of the Belmont Savings & Loan Company. The marriage of Mr. Kern was to Catherine Roder, who was born in Hesse, Germany, and a family of 12 children were born to them, eight of these survive and all live in Bellaire, with the exception of one who resides at Richmond, Virginia. The handsome family residence is located on Belmont street in South Bellaire, where the family is much esteemed and has a wide circle of friends. In politics Mr. Kern is a Democrat and has voted that ticket since 1859. For 20 years he served his township as trustee and has been a member of the City Council of Bellaire for 10 years. Mr. Kern is a man of social instincts and belongs to many fraternal orders, including the Odd Fellows. For many years he has been a leading member of the German Reformed Church. [Source: "Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KING, AMBROSE G. - One of the honorable old names in Belmont County, one which has been conspicuous in agricultural, business and military life, is that of King. One of the family's leading representatives is Ambrose G. King, a prominent and successful farmer of Wayne township, who was born April 22, 1837, in Washington township, Belmont County, a son of Philip and Margaret (Danford) King.

Philip King was born in 1812, in Greene County, Pennsylvania, and was a son of Michael King, who was one of the early settlers of Monroe County, Ohio, and one of its most prosperous farmers. For nearly 70 years Philip King was a resident of Belmont County, a farmer of excellence, a merchant and tobacco handler of business integrity, a large land owner and a prominent Republican politician. For 27 years he served as justice of the peace in Wayne township, removing there when Ambrose was a boy, and he held other township offices with the efficiency of an honest and upright citizen. His death occurred in 1898.

The mother of our subject was Margaret Danford, a daughter of Hon. Ambrose Danford, at one time a State legislator. She died in 1872, at the age of 60 years. The surviving members of the family born to these parents are: P.L., who resides at Bethesda, Ohio; W.P., who is a merchant at Beallsville, Monroe County; Mary, who married William Miller, a farmer near Beallsville; and Ambrose G., of this biography.

The boyhood of Mr. King was spent in Wayne township and he was educated in the excellent schools at Barnesville. Until the outbreak of the Civil War, he had been mainly engaged in farming, having married and settled down to the enjoyment of domestic life. But Mr. King was too loyal and patriotic to ignore the call of the great President for defenders of the Union, and among the early enlistments of brave men, who hastened to Marietta, to enroll their names, we find that of Ambrose G. King, on August 13, 1861, in Company E, 36th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., and from that date until he received his honorable discharge as a veteran, at Columbus, Ohio, July 27, 1865, his life, energies and faithful service were devoted to his country. His connection during these years was with the 4th, the 8th, the 11th and the 14th Army Corps. So long and continuous a service could scarcely escape being dangerous and that Mr. King, or to give him his well-earned rank, Lieutenant King, saw hard fighting and was in the midst of it, was very conclusively proven by his three serious wounds, a coincidence being that all occurred in September, the first on the 17th in 1862, the second on the 20th in 1863, and the third on the 19th in 1864. His first wound, at the battle of Antietam, was serious enough to send him home on a furlough of 30 days, after which he rejoined his regiment. His second would was received at the charge at Chickamauga, a gunshot in the mouth, this necessitating a stay of two months in the hospital at Nashville, Tennessee. His wound was so serious, while his valor was so pronounced, that a newspaper deemed it notable enough to thus comment:

"At the battle of Chickamauga, Sergeant King, giving vent to his feelings when a bullet entered his mouth, passed through his cheek and carried with it some teeth, had hardly recovered from the shock when a Rebel demanded his gun, and he answered 'yes,' and plunged his bayonet through his body."

The third wound which this gallant officer received was at Opequan, in 1864, a gunshot wound in the forehead, and this necessitated a hospital residence, at Chestnut Hill, Pennsylvania, for a period of two months. At this time he was a veteran, his first service having honorably terminated February 14, 1864. On the same day he re-enlisted, in Company E, 36th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., and was transferred to Company F, 36th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf. and as above noted was honorably discharged in 1865. To his credit stands a long list of the most telling battles of the war: Lewisburg, Second Bull Run, Fredericksburg, South Mountain, Antietam, Tullahoma, Hoover's Gap, Chickamauga, Brown's Ferry, Missionary Ridge, Cloyd's Mountain, Lynchburg, Kenesaw Mountain, Cabletown, Charlestown, Winchester, Martinsburg, Halltown, Berryville, Opequan and Beverly. Lieutenant King is the popular commander of the G.A.R. post at Pilcher, an office he has filled since its organization, with the exception of two years. The King family was a remarkably loyal one, three brothers of our subject also serving with distinction; Michael, a member of the 3rd Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., now deceased, who was a prisoner for 26 months; Philip L.; and Charles H., a member of the 25th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., who died of the wounds he received at Gettysburg. The military spirit still lives in this patriotic family, and resulted in a grandson of our subject taking part in the Spanish-American War as a member of the 6th Illinois Regiment. This young man lost his life at Pittsburg, on September 23, 1902 - he was then employed on the Pennsylvania Railroad.

On December 23, 1858, Ambrose G. King was united in marriage with Amanda J. Hudson, a daughter of William and Susan (Knull) Hudson, who came to Ohio prior to the birth of Mrs. King. A family of seven children was born to this union, as follows: William R., residing near his father, married first a Miss Tittlow, who at death left two children, Maud and Lettie - the present wife, formerly a Miss Phillips, is the mother of an infant; Martha J., who is the wife of Leander Davis, resides in Wayne township, and they have six children; Charles S., who married Lucy Hocks, resides in Illinois, and they have two children; Benetta, who first married a Mr. Davis, had two children, her second husband being Mr. McFrederick, and their residence Jerusalem, Monroe County; Mary A., who is the wife of William Barrett, has three children and they live near Glencoe; Emma, who is a trained nurse in Philadelphia; and Kate M., who resides in Barnesville. Mr. King and sons are unusually fine specimens of physical manhood, the father being six feet four inches tall and weighing 240 pounds, his son Charles reaching six feet six inches and weighing 230 pounds, while William is almost an equal, weighing 227 pounds and being six feet three inches in height.

Farming on his well-cultivated 50 acres is the main business of this soldier-citizen, but he has been many times honored with township offices in the gift of the people and the Republican party. As a justice of the peace he has given excellent satisfaction, and now is a notary public in Pilcher. His fraternal association with the Knights of Pythias at Jerusalem, Monroe County, is of long standing. Our subject is well known through Wayne township and is a representative man and a justly honored survivor of that great struggle which convulsed the country and absorbed its best blood, 40 years ago.

In six trips across the plains, during which he visited the Black Hills, Colorado and California, Mr. King also was a participant in some Indian fighting. . ["Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KING, W.R. -- one of the well-known farmers of Wayne township, Belmont County, and a citizen of prominence and public spirit, was born October 2, 1861, in Wayne township, a son of Ambrose G. King, one of the leading citizens of Belmont County.

W.R. King was reared to agricultural pursuits, and acquired an excellent common-school education. His services were given to his father on the home farm, until he reached his legal majority, when he took a trip to the West, and located in Bureau County, Illinois, for six years, being employed during this time among the Illinois farmers, who contracted for his services by the year. In 1890 he returned to his native State, and a short time later purchased a farm of 80 acres east of Newcastle, but later sold that property and bought his present farm in section 20, Wayne township, near the village of Pilcher. This was considered a very desirable farm, being known as the Philip King farm, and was owned by William G. Budd. It comprises 160 acres and is well adapted to both general farming and also stock raising, Mr. King making a specialty of sheep. Formerly he raised quantities of tobacco, but does not now make that a leading crop. The excellent improvements have been placed here by our subject, and he now owns one of the attractive as well as very valuable farms of the township. In method he is practical, and he has been eminently successful.

The first marriage of Mr. King was to Josephine Titlow, a daughter of John Titlow. She died in 1899, leaving two daughters, viz.: Dora Maud and Lettie Pearl. Mr. King married for his second wife Amanda Phillips, a daughter of John Strickling, of Monroe County, Ohio, and one child has been born to this union - Lura May.

Mr. King is a staunch Republican, and in the spring of 1896 was elected township trustee, and served most acceptably for two terms, or six years. Fraternally he is a popular member of the Knights of Pythias of Jerusalem, Ohio. Mrs. King is a consistent member of the Christian Church and Mr. King contributes to its support and attends the services. [Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens, edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KLOTZ, A . Among the prominent and representative citizens of Bellaire, Ohio, this well-known merchant and banker takes a leading position, identified as he is with many of the most important business enterprises, educational projects and public-spirited movements of the city.

The birth of Mr. Klotz occurred in France June 13, 1846; he is a son of Moses Klotz, who was a butcher by trade, with whom our subject worked for some years after finishing school, so thoroughly learning the business that he was able to pursue it for himself in the city of Paris, where he continued until February, 1868. This has been one of the elements of Mr. Klotz's success, to do thoroughly and well whatever came under his notice. After the death of the father in 1867, the family scattered, a number of them coming to America. There were 12 children in all, six of whom still survive, these being, exclusive of our subject: Mrs. Charles Mayer, of Cincinnati, whose husband was a partner with Mr. Klotz at Bellaire, from 1868 to 1885, but is now living retired; Mrs. A.L. Rice, whose husband was formerly in the wholesale millinery business at Wheeling, but is now engaged in the slate business at Slatington, Pennsylvania; Elise, who resides with Mrs. Rice; Samuel, who was formerly engaged at Bellaire in the gents' furnishing business, in 1884 went to Piscoe, Peru, where he is engaged in exporting; and one sister who still resides in France.

Some members of Mr. Klotz's family had located in Wheeling, West Virginia, and hither our subject came in September, 1868, with no capital except ability, industry and good habits, and from such a foundation Mr. Klotz has built up his fortunes. Engaging with his brother-in-law in the gents' furnishing business at Bellaire, Ohio, under the firm name of Mayer & Klotz, the young man soon demonstrated his business acumen and in 1885 purchased Mr. Mayer's interest and ever since has been the largest dealer in his line in the city. In 1877 he business was moved to its present location at No. 3211 Union street, where three floors are utilized; the building contains the only passenger elevator in use in the city. Mr. Klotz has greatly enlarged the scope of his business, which now embraces a full line of dry goods, carpets, ready-made clothes, and gents' furnishing goods, requiring the assistance of 10 capable salesmen and much outside help. The equipments are all of a modern character, the cash-carrier system is in use, and the business is carried on with dispatch and accuracy which is very gratifying to its many patrons.

Mr. Klotz has been identified with many of the leading business interests of the city, notably the Dollar Savings Bank of which he is president, in which he has been interested from the start and served a number of years as its vice-president; he is also vice-president of the Novelty Stamping Company, and has long been connected with the Enterprise Enamel Company, a very successful business venture.

The marriage of Mr. Klotz was to a daughter of E.C. Morris, who is the retired proprietor of the Globe House, of Bellaire. One son, Charles L., was born to this union, who is a very able young business man; at the age of 17 years he was conducting a successful livery business at Bellaire, and is now engaged in the grocery business at Altoona, Pennsylvania. Since 1870, Mr. Klotz has been a Mason, and belongs to Ionic Lodge, F. & A.M., and Bellaire Chapter, R.A.M. He has always shown a liberal public spirit, has participated in the public affairs of the community and has been liberal along both private and religious lines. On the Board of Trade he has been active for many years and for the past 10 years has served the city on the Board of Health. In his business career he has made many friends, but they are more than equaled by those who esteem him in private life. [Source: "Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KNEPPER, Emanuel L. : Emanuel L. Knepper, a farmer and stock dealer of Somerset county, Pennsylvania, was born in Brothers Valley township, March 22, 1865, the son of Lewis J. and Magdalena (Meyers) Knepper.

John Knepper (great-grandfather) was born in 1765. He removed to Somerset county, locating in Brothers Valley township. He was a shoemaker by trade. He married Anna Maria Glessner, by whom children were born as follows: William, who served in the war of 1812; Jacob, John, Lewis, Peter, Jonathan, George, Somon, Henry, Benjamin, Elizabeth (Mrs. Hauger); Catherine (Mrs. Hay); and Polly (Mrs. Haas).

John Knepper (grandfather) was born in Somerset county in 1795. He was the first Abolitionist in Brothers Valley, and the only voter in the township who cast his ballot for the Free Soil candidates. He married Susan Stahl, and children were born as follows: Lewis J., Solomon, David, John, Peter, James, Sarah (Mrs. Coleman), Elizabeth (Mrs. Graham), Rebecca (Mrs. Cober), Polly (Mrs. Smith), and Susan (Mrs. Myers). John Knepper, father of the above named children, died in 1857.

Lewis J. Knepper (father) was born November 29, 1819, in Brothers Valley township. He was educated in the public schools of the township, in which he afterward taught for twenty-one years. Abandoning the profession of teaching, he turned his attention to farming, which occupation he followed for the remainder of his active working life. In politics he was a Republican, and during his life held many township offices. In early life he connected himself with the German Baptist church, and died in that faith. He held the office of deacon in his church for thirty-five years. He was interested in all branches of church and benevolent work, and assisted William G. Schrock to establish the first Sabbath school in the Brothers Valley congregation. Mr. Knepper was twice married: First to Magdalena Meyers, September 9, 1849, born January 24, 1824, a daughter of Jacob and Hannah (Lichty) Meyers. Of this marriage children were born as follows: Mary A., deceased; Jacob M.; Solomon M.; William M., deceased; Elizabeth S., Ellen R., and Emanuel L. After the death of his first wife, which occurred in October, 1865, Mr. Knepper married Elizabeth Walker, and to them were born four children, Charles W. and Edward, both farmers of Brothers Valley, and Henry and Emma, who died in childhood. The death of Lewis J. Knepper occurred April 6, 1888.

Emanuel L. Knepper was educated in the public schools of the township and in the Berlin Normal school. He attended school and assisted with the farm work until he was sixteen years of age, when he commenced teaching school, and was so occupied for six years. At the age of twenty-three he married and commenced farming, on the farm which he bought in 1892. It comprises two hundred and sixty acres of land, on which is a sugar camp of 1,200 vessels, producing about 4,000 pounds of maple sugar annually. In 1895 he commenced the buying and shipping of cattle, which has since become his principal business. He is also an extensive feeder of live stock, using the entire grain and hay output of his farm in that way. This branch of his business has necessitated the building of a large barn, equipped with modern appliances, which has just been completed. Mr. Knepper uses all modern labor-saving devices in his farming operations.

In politics he is a staunch and loyal Republican, and has always evinced a lively interest in the advancement and progress of that party. He is a school director, and has held many township offices. He is a director of the First National Bank of Berlin and of the Farmers' Fire Insurance Company, Somerset county. He is a member of the German Baptist church and Sunday school, and has been deacon in the church for eight years.

He married, October 21, 1888, Emma S. Schrock, daughter of Rev. William G. Schrock (see Schrock sketch). Emma was born on her father's farm, November 3, 1865, and was educated in the public schools, Berlin Normal school and Juniata College, Juniata, Pennsylvania. Of this marriage one child has been born, Lewis Schrock, September 11, 1889. He is a manly lad, receiving his education in the public schools and normal school. The large interests of Mr. Knepper involves the employment of many men, which materially adds to Mrs. Knepper's duties as housewife, yet there is always room for one more at their hospitable board, and no stranger is ever turned away." [History of Bedford and Somerset Counties, Pennsylvania" Bedford County by E. Howard Blackburn; Somerset County by William H. Welfley; v.3, Pub. The Lewis Publishing Company, New York/Chicago 1906, pg. 305-7]

KNOX, JAMES THOMAS -- a wealthy land owner of Richland township, Belmont County, Ohio, is a man of firm character, has always shown an interest in township and county affairs, and is now serving in the office of township trustee. He is a native of the farm adjoining his own, and was born in 1862, a son of William and Mary (King) Knox, the latter of Irish descent.

William Knox was an active citizen in his day and claimed Wheeling, West Virginia, as his native city. His arrival in Belmont County took place in the year 1862 and he immediately located in Richland township, purchased a farm there and followed agricultural pursuits the remainder of his days with marked success. He chose Mary King, a daughter of Andrew and Elizabeth (Blackwood) King, for his companion in life, and their union was blessed with 11 children, whose names will be given later. In politics Mr. Knox was a sincere Republican, and in his religious convictions he was a member of the United Presbyterian Church, as was also his wife. Both lived to advanced ages, the death of the former taking place in the spring of 1902, at the age of 73. Mrs. Knox's demise occurred in 1898, at the age of 62 years.

Our subject's brothers and sisters are as follows: Rev. A.K. Knox, who is a minister of the Presbyterian Church at Mt. Vernon, Iowa; Jemima, the wife of Robert Alexander, of Quincy, Belmont County, Ohio; Lizzie (1), now deceased; John, Maggie and Carrie, who live on the home place; Mary, who married Frank Myers and resides in Smith township; Calvin and Jennie, who are both deceased; and Lizzie, the widow of James A. Greenlees, living on the old Knox homestead.

Our subject was reared on the farm and obtained his education in the common schools. He chose farming as his vocation, naturally, and at the present time he is the owner of 145 acres of land on the home place and 18 acres adjoining it, all of which he keeps in first-rate order and in a state of high cultivation. He chose for his wife Anna May McMaster, and they were married in 1890. Mrs. Knox is a daughter of William and Isabel McMaster and was born in 1867, a native of Richland township. Their union has been blessed with one child, Carl, who was born in 1892. The family live on the farm about four miles south of St. Clairsville, and are very comfortably situated. In religious belief they are members of the United Presbyterian Church.

Mr. Knox has always been a Republican, and upon the death of John Stewart, who was then township trustee, he was elected to fill the vacancy, serving with such satisfaction to all that he was re-elected for a full term in the spring of 1902. Besides this he has been school director for some time, and gives his support willingly to all enterprises which have for their aim the welfare of his township or county. As a citizen of worth and value he receives the reward due him, through the respect and consideration of those in his community. [Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens, edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KOEHNLINE, JOHN J. - deceased, was for many years a prominent man of Bridgeport, Ohio, and during his long and useful life stood among the foremost and most enterprising citizens of Belmont County. He was born in Fulton, (West) Virginia, March 28, 1840, being the second child and eldest son of John M. and Elizabeth (Klem) Koehnline.

John M. Koehnline was born in Wurtemberg, Germany, in 1816, and came to the United States in 1838. This trip was made on board a sailing vessel and he was four months on the way. He located in Bellaire, Ohio, removing some time later to Marshall County, West Virginia - while living there his marriage took place. His wife, Elizabeth Klem, was a native of Baden, Germany, and their marriage was consummated at Bellaire, Ohio. Mrs. Koehnline died February 5, 1899, at the advanced age of 81 years and five months. Six children were born to her and her husband, as follows: Elizabeth, John J., the subject of this biography; Jacob; Catherine B.; Henry; and William. Elizabeth, who married Nicholas Zimmer, died at the age of 58 years. Jacob enlisted in the Union Army during the Civil War, serving four years. He finally died from cholera, after an illness of about five hours. Catherine married William Conway and is also deceased. Henry is a resident of the city of Bridgeport, Ohio, and William is a contractor and builder and real estate dealer of the same city.

John M. Koehnline was a pioneer in this section of the country. He opened the mine between Aetna and Bridgeport, during the war, having removed to the latter place in 1863, and engaged in the coal business. He shipped the product of his mine as far south as New Orleans. His death took place in 1875.

John J. Koehnline, our subject, was educated in his native place and was one of the pioneer river men on the Ohio River. He boated coal to Cincinnati and Louisville, from Bridgeport and often from Pittsburg. He had a steamboat of his own called the "General Harrison," and was also engaged in transferring freight across the river at Bellaire. In 1890, he moved up the river opposite the Wheeling steel bridge, and carried on the coal business from that point. This mine is now run by his sons, and is the largest retail mine in the city, furnishing employment to upward of 18 men.

In company with his brother, William, our subject opened an ice house, under the firm name of Koehnline Brothers and for a number of years carried on a successful business. Later an artificial ice plant was started by our subject and his son, George, and a flourishing business in that line has been carried on to the present day, the son having succeeded to the business. The plant has a capacity of 24 tons per day and during the summer season furnishes employment for 10 or 12 men. Four wagons are required to distribute ice, the product being disposed of in Bridgeport and vicinity. The running expenses of the plant exceed $200 per week, and it ranks among the most practical and useful enterprises in the city.

Mr. Koehnline was quite an extensive property owner, and floated the first coal to Louisville after the war. He enlisted in the Union Army, June 1, 1861, as a private in the 2nd Reg., West Virginia Vol. Inf., which later became a cavalry regiment. Our subject served with the regiment throughout his term of service, having enlisted for four years. He was engaged principally in scout and picket duty previous to 1864, and during that time participated in the engagements at Lewisburg, Sinking Creek, Wytheville, and various others. He was subsequently attached to Milroy's Brigade, 3rd Division, 3rd Army Corps, of the Army of West Virginia. He was with all the movements of the regiment until he was honorably discharged from service at the expiration of his term at Camp Carlisle, June 6, 1864. He took active part in the battles of Bull Run, Kelley's Ford, Rocky Faced Gap, Allegheny Mountain, and Beverly, and in the minor engagements of Cloyd's Run, Piedmont, New Market, and many other skirmishes. He also took part in Averill's famous raid. He was wounded in battle, but never severely, but had numerous narrow escapes from danger by reason of his personal disregard of danger.

October 7, 1871, Mr. Koehnline was united in marriage with Miss Cilles, a daughter of George and Barbara (Smith) Cilles. The ceremony was performed on Wheeling Island, Rev. J.T. Latane, an Episcopalian divine of Wheeling, officiating. Mrs. Koehnline is the eldest of 10 children. Her father was a gardener by occupation and died in 1897, aged 76 years. He was a member of the Luthern Church. His wife, whose death took place during the same year, was a faithful member of the Catholic Church. Mr. and Mrs. Cilles reared the following children: Mrs. Koehnline, widow of our subject; Casper, who resides near Parkersburg, West Virginia; Minnie, deceased; Amelia, who died when about 32 years old; Christina; Louisa, who died aged 19 years; Tillie, wife of William Baker, of Wheeling; Jennie, a stenographer and bookkeeper in Wheeling; Rosa, who died aged 13 years; and George, a gardener of Wheeling Island.

Mr. Koehnline's death took place April 14, 1902, being 62 years and 17 days old at the time of his demise. He was not only an interesting character, but was a valued citizen as well. He lived almost all his life in Bridgeport, and was prominently connected with many of the important business enterprises of this city. He was a worthy and upright citizen and he was deeply mourned by a large number of citizens in this section of Ohio. He was a valued member of the G.A.R., and was past commander and treasurer of the same. Politically, he was an ardent Republican. In religious circles both he and Mrs. Koehnline were active members and workers, the former being a member of the German Lutheran Church; and the latter had been a member of the Episcopal Church since her 10th year. She has ever been a devoted and active worker in both church and Sunday-school work, contributing very liberally toward the support of both.

Mr. and Mrs. Koehnline reared a large family. Nine children were born to them, viz.: John J., Jr., who died in infancy; George M.; Rosa B., who married James W. Dillon, of Bridgeport, and has one child, Elmer W.; James A.; Katie E., who was a member of the graduating class of 1902 of the Bridgeport High School, is assistant bookkeeper in the office of her brothers; Thomas; Harrison and Mary A. and Frederick, who died in infancy.

George M. Koehnline and his brother, James A., succeeded their father, John J. Koehnline, in the coal and ice business, and are regarded as being among the most successful and rising young merchants of Bridgeport. ["Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KOEHNLINE, WILLIAM a contractor, builder, and real estate man of Bridgeport, Ohio, has led an active life since his early years. He is a son of John M. and Elizabeth (Klem) Koehnline, and was born in Benwood, Marshall County, (West) Virginia, April 4, 1858.

John M. Koehnline was a native of Wurtemberg, Germany, born in 1816, and in 1838 left his native country and came to the United States, being on the water four months in a sailing vessel. Bellaire became his home upon his arrival in this country, and some time later he moved to Marshall County, West Virginia, previous to locating permanently in Bridgeport in the winter of 1863. There he bought coal mines and shipped the coal from them as far south as New Orelans. He made a success of his business and was respected by all who knew him.

He chose for his wife Elizabeth Klem also of German nativity, and claiming Baden as her birthplace. They had a family of six children, who were as follows: Elizabeth married Nicholas Zimmer, and died in her fifty-eighth year. John was engaged for twenty years in partnership with our subject, William, in the coal business and his death took place recently, April 14, 1902, at the age of sixty-two years. He served his country valiantly for four years as a private in one of the companies recruited in West Virginia. Before the close of the war he was severely wounded by a shell and up to the time of his death it caused him trouble and pain. Jacob, who enlisted in the war about the same time as his brother, was in a different regiment and served nearly four years also. His death at Carlton, Kentucky, in 1866, was caused by cholera after a sickness of about five hours. Catherine B., who was Mrs. William Conway, is now deceased. Henry resides in Bridgeport. William, subject of these lines, is the youngest in the family.

Mr. Koehnline's death took place in 1875 and his widow survived him until she attained the age of eighty-one years and five months and then also departed this life, on the 5th day of February, 1899. Both parents were members of the German Lutheran Church.

William Koehnline received his education in the public schools of Bridgeport, and subsequently embarked in the coal and ice business, in partnership with his brother, John, under the firm name of Koehnline Brothers, continuing for twenty years when he was engaged in business as a real estate dealer and and a contractor and builder, in which he has continued to the present day. Success has crowned his efforts and he is esteemed as a good citizen who is public-spirited and enterprising. He served as school director seven years, and for eleven years was councilman, serving during the period when the city progressed rapidly and built the sewerage and water works as necessary improvements to its welfare and advancement.

November 17, 1889, our subject was united in marriage with Rachel Fox, a daughter of Jacob and Christiana Fox, and a native of Belmont County. She was one of a number of children, seven of whom are now living, as follows: Lizzie, now Mrs. Lewis Cook; William; Fred; Rachel, wife of our subject; Henry; Mary, employed as cashier for the Bell Telephone Company; and Edward.

Our subject and his wife have five children, four of whom are attending school. They are as follows: William, Irvin, Mabel, Elizabeth and an infant. The family are all faithful members of the German Lutheran Church. In fraternal circles he affiliates with the F. & A.M. He is considered one of the substantial and essential citizens of Bridgeport and certainly does his part to help in its advancement. [Source: "Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KORNER, GEORGE A. - Among the successful and busy men of York township, is George A. Korner, a well-known farmer and dairyman, and also a business man who for some years has been identified with the coal interests of both Belmont and Monroe counties.

Mr. Korner is of German extraction, born in York township, Belmont County, in 1853. He is a son of Henry and Doris (Dempewolf) Korner, the latter of whom was born in Germany and died in Ohio, in 1895, aged 82 years. Henry Korner, the father, was born in 1810, in Germany and about the time of his majority came to the United States, finding his first employment in the lumber regions of the State of New York. His adopted country was at that time having some differences with France, and the young man enlisted in the United States Navy, as a member of a band, and on the historic old ship "Constitution" cruised through the Mediterranean and stopped at many European ports during his four years of service. After all his travel, Mr. Korner selected Belmont County, Ohio, as his choice of residence, and at Steinersville, York township, he engaged in a mercantile business for several years. He then purchased the farm near the town, now owned by our subject, and engaged in farming until 1881, when his death occurred. Mr. Korner married Dora Dempewolf and they reared a family of seven children, as follows: Theodore, who is a resident of Portsmouth, Virginia; Gustavus, who resides at Bradford, Pennsylvania; Louisa (Mrs. Aggers), who resides in Seattle, Washington; Lewis, who is a resident of Prairie Depot, Ohio; George A.; Albert, a resident of Columbus, who was formerly a teacher in Belmont County; and Dr. Alexander, who practices his profession at Woodsfield, Ohio.

Mr. Korner has engaged in extensive farming operations and has been also interested in modern dairying. In addition he has given much attention to the optioning of coal lands, both in Belmont and Monroe counties, and is well known through the locality as a keen, successful man of business enterprise. In the fall of 1901 he built his handsome residence in Steinersville, which, in modern equipment, comfort and convenience, is not equaled in York township. He has introduced a complete system of waterworks, finding his supply in a spring on an adjacent hill, this being the first private plant in the township.

On February 22, 1888, Mr. Korner was united in marriage with Clara Stackhouse, a daughter of Joshua Stackhouse, an old pioneer of the county, and to this union have been born two children - Doris, aged 12 years, and Waldo, aged 10 years, both of whom are bright pupils at school. Mr. Korner has always been identified with the Democratic party, although no seeker for office, his varied business interests fully occupying the time not filled with personal and social activities. He is very well known in his locality and enjoys a full measure of the esteem of his fellow citizens, and is reckoned among the solid men of old York township. ["Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KRAATZ, AUGUST - now living in retirement at No. 816 Broadway, Martin's Ferry, is one of the thrifty German citizens who have helped to build up the industries of the city. For over a quarter of a century he was engaged as a skilled blacksmith and has amassed considerable wealth. He is now a large stockholder in the People's Bank and the Belmont Brewery and is a director in the latter. He is also an inventor of considerable note.

Mr. Kraatz was born in Mechlenburg, Germany, November 16, 1845, and when quite young lost his father. He was, however, given careful training by his mother, a most excellent woman. She is still living in Germany and is now 80 years old.

In the excellent schools of his native country Mr. Kraatz procured a good, thorough education. Having a decided liking for mechanics, at an early age he entered a blacksmith shop and learned the trade, becoming in the course of time very proficient. Well equipped for life, at the age of 21 he determined to come to the United States. Soon after landing he proceeded to Wheeling, where he remained for eight years. He found no difficulty in securing positions, and during his stay in Wheeling followed his trade for some of the time at the old Washington Mill and later in connection with the iron works. Coming to Martin's Ferry at the end of this period, he engaged himself as a blacksmith in the Aetna Standard Mill, where he remained until February, 1902, a period of 26 years. That his work has been in every respect satisfactory and first-class goes without saying. During this period he invented the long squaring shear-knives, an excellent article, which has been on the market for the last 17 years. It has had a large sale. A steady, hard worker all his life, Mr. Kraatz has made considerable money, which he has invested to much advantage in brewery stock and in the People's Bank. Owing to his business ability, he has been made a director of the Belmont Brewery.

While residing in Wheeling, in 1869, Mr. Kraatz married Eliza Bieberson, who was born in Hanover, Germany, March 16, 1845. She is one of three children. Her brother, Henry Bieberson, is now president of the Belmont Brewery. Her sister, Wilhelmina, married August Rolf and resides on Market street, in Wheeling. Mr. and Mrs. Kraatz have had nine children: Matilda married William H. Helfenbine, and resides at Martin's Ferry; Emma, wife of Edwin Oppelt, of East Liverpool, Ohio, has a son, Oscar; Clara, who have never married, lives at home; Charles, who married Enola Rohrich, is assistant engineer at the Belmont Brewery in Martin's Ferry; Fredericka lives at home; Harry is in the grocery business with his brother-in-law in East Liverpool; George, who works in the Aetna Standard Mill; Eliza, who died February 10, 1893, at the age of 10; Gertrude, who died December 26, 1901, at the age of 14 years and three months.

Mr. Kraatz is a man whose word carries weight in his community. As a Republican he exerts a large influence in local politics. Fraternally he belongs to the B.P.O.E. Both he and his wife are prominent members of the German Lutheran Church. In 1901 Mr. Kraatz made a trip to Germany, paying a visit to his aged mother, and in October, 1902, he took an extended trip throughout the Southwestern States, visiting Texas principally, and had a most enjoyable time. . ["Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

KRAUTER, E.G., a well-known farmer of Pease township, Belmont County, Ohio, was born in Southern Germany in 1856, and resided there until he reached the age of eighteen years. He then came on a visit to his uncle, William Burkle, who at that time was a butcher of Bridgeport, Ohio. Mr. Krauter engaged in the grocery business successfully at Martin's Ferry for a period of eight years, then sold out to Louis Scheehle. He has since given his attention to farming.

Mr. Krauter is residing on the old Van Pelt farm, which he purchased in 1887 from Hiram McCombs, the grantee of Margaret Blocher, who had purchased the property at the division of the Van Pelt estate. Jacob Van Pelt had located on the place as early as 1825, and the family owned a large tract of land in Pease township. He built the brick part of the house now occupied by our subject in 1850, to which the latter added and remodeled, making a very attractive home. The Van Pelts, who were very prominent in this county, have all passed away. Oliver Van Pelt, the last of the name in this county, was born in 1831 and died August 15, 1902, having always lived in Pease township. Of the old homestead Mr. Krauter has 66 acres, and during the past fourteen years has been engaged in the dairy business, wholesaling to a milkman at Martin's Ferry. His farm is well stocked and he makes a specialty of Jersey and Holstein cattle. He also purchased the James Wiley home of 150 acres in 1897. The Wiley farm he leases on shares. He grows fruit extensively and devotes the upper part of his farm to raising grain and stock.

Mr. Krauter was united in marriage with a daughter of Christ Hoffman of Ohio County, West Virginia, he being a retired butcher residing in Fulton. To this union were born two daughters, Carrie and Minnie, aged 20 and 16 years, respectively. In politics our subject has always been a Republican. He has been a member of the board of education for the past twelve years, and for ten years has been commissioner of the Martin's Ferry & Colerain Pike. Fraternally he is a member of the National Union. Religiously he is a German Lutheran, but his family is Presbyterian. [Source: "Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

LAMBERT, John M. : John M. Lambert, of Lambertsville, is descended from ancestors who were among the pioneers of Stony Creek township. About 1789 three brothers, John, George and Jacob Lambert, came from York county and took up lands in Stony Creek and Shade townships. John, who settled in Stony Creek, married Mary Statler, who bore him the following children: Samuel, of whom later; Jacob, John, Moses, Mary, Samuel and Catharine, wife of Solomon Kimmel. Samuel Lambert, son of John and Mary (Statler) Lambert, was born in Stony Creek township and was the owner of a large estate, including about six hundred acres of fine timber land. He was a Whig and a member of the Reformed church. He married Sarah Good, by whom he was the father of the following children: Josiah, Aaron, Rebecca, Sarah; Abraham, in honor of whom Lambertsville received its name; John; Samuel, of whom later; Moses, George and Mary, wife of Cyrus Berkebile. Mr. Lambert died in 1869, aged seventy-five years. Samuel Lambert, Jr., son of Samuel and Sarah (Good) Lambert, was born November 7, 1826, where Lambertsville now stands, and attended the public schools of the township. His trade, which was that of a wagon maker, he followed all his life in his native town. He was also the proprietor of a sash factory. He held the office of tax collector. He was originally a Whig, but later became a Republican. His religious belief was that of the German Reformed church, in which he served as deacon. Samuel Lambert, Jr., married Nancy E. Mostoller, born November 7, 1836, and received her education in the public schools. She was a daughter of Joseph Mostoller, born May 5, 1800, and married Sarah Mowry. Mr. Mostoller died December, 1889.

Mr. and Mrs. Lambert were the parents of the following children: Edward M., lumberman of Berlin, married Annie Fritz; Calvin; Francis Orange, died in childhood; Cyrenius A., died at the age of sixteen; Azariah, died at the age of thirty-four; Lorenzo, farmer in Wisconsin, Republican, married Mary Hayes and has two children, Hayes and Ray; Jarius, lumberman of Kimmelton, Republican, married Annie Woods and after her death Clara Wright; children of first marriage, Homer and Percy, and those of second, Arlington and Mildred; Ellsworth J., farmer of Stony Creek township, Republican, married Maggie Gohn, and after her death Bertha Cook; children of first marriage, Bertie Orange, Ida and Guy; Irvin L., miner of Downey, Republican, married Kate Landis and has three children, George, Blanche and Lee; Sidney, professional nurse, graduate of Memorial Hospital, Johnstown; John M., of whom later. Mr. Lambert, the father of the family, died October 7, 1897, and his widow resides with her youngest son.

John M. Lambert, son of Samuel and Nancy E. (Mostoller) Lambert, was born June 11, 1870, in Lambertsville, and obtained his education in the common and normal schools, where he qualified as an instructor. At the age of seventeen he completed his education, and for five years thereafter was engaged in teaching. When twenty-two years old he entered the railway postal service, having the year before passed the civil service examination in Pittsburg. He was first employed in the Pittsburg & Fair Chance railway post office, where he remained sixteen months. At the end of that time he was transferred to the New York and Pittsburg railway post office. On this exceedingly important and difficult run he remained six years and then secured a transfer to the Johnstown and Rockwood railway post office, where he was employed six years. Mr. Lambert is extensively interested in lumbering, his associate in the business being his brother Jarius. The firm has a tract of sixty acres of timber land, and a sawmill at Mostoller Station, where they saw and ship the manufactured timber, pine, hemlock, oak and other hardwoods forming the principal output of their mill. Mr. Lambert resides on a tract of twenty acres, which he purchased of his father, the farm producing an abundance of fruit of all kinds. He is a life member of Johnstown Lodge, No. 175, Benevolent Protective Order of Elks. In politics he has always affiliated with the Republicans, having cast his first presidential vote in 1892 for Benjamin Harrison.

Mr. Lambert married, July 2, 1895, Ora Goodrich, and their children are: Quay, born December 30, 1896, and Evelyn, born November 17, 1902. Mrs. Lambert is a daughter of Augustus and Matilda Goodrich, the former a lumberman of Indiana county, Pennsylvania. She was born December 11, 1874, was educated in the public schools and is a member of the Presbyterian church." History of Bedford and Somerset Counties, Pennsylvania" Bedford County by E. Howard Blackburn; Somerset County by William H. Welfley; v.3, Pub. The Lewis Publishing Company, New York/Chicago 1906, pg. 204-206

LANE, ISAAC R. -- who represents the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Company's interests in Barnesville, Ohio, is one of the city's representative men. He was born October 20, 1842, and is a son of Harrison and Rebecca (Cox) Lane. His great-grandfather was Thomas Lane, who died December 10, 1819, at the advanced age of 107 years, and his grandfather, Richard Lane, died in the same year, at the age of 42 years. His father was born in Maryland, July 14, 1812, and died October 1, 1875. In 1833, he was a citizen of Belmont County. On December 25, 1834, he married Rebecca Cox, the daughter of a widow, whose husband died in 1833. After the death of Mr. Cox, his widow with her son and four daughters moved to Barnesville and their first night spent in Warren township was one of misfortune. They stopped over night with Thomas Tannyhill, in a house west of the city, and there the son, Isaac, fell down stairs and was instantly killed.

The primary education of Mr. Lane was obtained in a little, old, brick school house in Barnesville. At the age of 16 years he entered the printing office of the "Barnesville Intelligencer," as a compositor, under George B. McClellan, who was a son-in-law of the late Jesse Judkins. On August 5, 1862, the young printer enlisted as a private in Company H, 94th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., and saw hard service until the close of the war. At that time this regiment, which was a part of Gen. George H. Thomas' famous 14th Army Corps, was actively engaged in the Tennessee campaign, and participated in the battle of Chickamauga, together with the hardships at Chattanooga, where the brave soldiers stood fast until the Bragg siege was raised by the successful battles of Lookout Mountain and Missionary Ridge. The gallant 94th took part in Hooker's battle above the clouds, and left many of its brave men on the field. Mr. Lane also participated, in the summer of 1864, in the capture of Atlanta, and marched under Sherman to the sea. Resting for a short time at Savannah, the regiment's active work was resumed, and the march was continued through the swamps of the Carolinas, in constant rain; but, nevertheless, it safely reached Washington and took a conspicuous and deserved part in the final grand review. It was mustered out June 5, 1865, although out of the 1,000 brave men who had loyally marched away but three years before, only 238 men, battered and travel-worn, but honored, remained to tell of the horrors of war, and to congratulate each other on a safe return.

Since the close of the war, Mr. Lane has been chiefly engaged in the railroad service, and has held many positions of responsibility. For a time, he was in a railroad office at Bellaire; he was chief bookkeeper of a wholesale house; he was for a time in Columbus; and for several years he was secretary and treasurer of one of the large iron companies of Portsmouth, Ohio. Since 1878 he has been the trusted agent for the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Company at Barnesville, and is held in the highest esteem by the officials of that great line.

On February 18, 1868, Mr. Lane was united in marriage with Mary A. Warfield, a daughter of the prominent citizen and noted surgeon, Dr. J.W. Warfield, who won distinction as surgeon of the 77th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., and was also made brigade and division surgeon. Four children were born to Mr. and Mrs. Lane, namely: Rufus H., Fred W., Jessie, and Isaac. Rufus H. entered the United States Naval Academy, in 1887, and graduated from that institution in the fall of 1881. He served through the Spanish-American War on Admiral Sampson's flagship, the "New York," and after the war was promoted to be a captain. He is now serving on the U.S. battleship "Kentucky," in Chinese and Japanese waters. Fred W. completed a course at the university at Wooster, Ohio, and graduated from the medical department of the University of Pennsylvania, in 1893. He is now one of the leading physicians and surgeons of Cambridge, Ohio. Jessie and Isaac have passed through the city schools. The family is connected with the Presbyterian Church. Mr. Lane has been a lifelong Republican in politics and is actively interested in the success of that party. He has taken part in many public enterprises and has served in many civic positions. For three years he was a trustee of the Belmont County Children's Home; for two years a member of the Barnesville City Council, and for six years the very useful president of the Board of Education. He was honored with an election as commander of G.A.R. Post No. 220, and was a delegate from Ohio to the national encampment held in 1886, in San Francisco.

Mr. Lane fulfills the idea of a first-class citizen. In his business he is honorable and upright, in public life he is conscientious and painstaking, and in social life he takes a prominent position on account of his genial disposition and pleasing personality. The family is held in the highest esteem in Barnesville. [Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens, edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

LAUGHLIN, HON. JOHN W., one of the most influential citizens and enterprising and successful farmers of Belmont County, Ohio, is now living a retired life at his beautiful country home, about one and a half miles west of Barnesville. Mr. Laughlin is an Ohioan by birth, being a native of Washington, Guernsey County, and his birth dates back to March 15, 1837. He is a son of Thomas W. and Jane T. (Robe) Laughlin, whose family consisted of five children.

Our subject was reared on a farm and received his early education in the common schools. He subsequently attended Miller Academy in his native county; and at that time, this institution enjoyed quite a reputation for thoroughness. In 1858, Mr. Laughlin entered Jefferson College at Cannonsburg, Pennsylvania, where he completed an extensive course, graduating from that institution in 1861.

The following year he took up the cause of the stars and stripes, and it was his pleasure to defend that emblem of union and strength for several years thereafter. January 20th of that year he enlisted as a private in Company B, 1st Reg., Ohio Vol. Cavalry. He rose rapidly from the ranks and became successively second lieutenant, first lieutenant and then adjutant. For a brief period he served as captain of Company K, and commanded two companies while acting as General Howard's escort. His military record was most praiseworthy; he served three years and nine months, and was honorably discharged from the service September 13, 1865, at Hilton Head, S.C.

Returning from the war covered with honors, his marriage with Maggie J. Cowden was chronicled in November of the same year. Mrs. Laughlin is a daughter of David and Margery Cowden and is one of a family of four children. She was born at the old Cowden home, near Quaker City, Ohio. Her parents were both natives of Ireland, and but one of their children survive, our subject's wife's brother, W.N. Cowden. The latter was at one time president of the Ohio State Board of Agriculture, and also served as secretary of the Ohio Wool Growers' Association. Mrs. Laughlin died December 11, 1893.

Ten children were born to Mr. and Mrs. Laughlin, namely: Emma E., Thomas C., David A. and Albert W. (twins), Anna, James N., John C., Palmer H., Lelia J., and Lester M. Of these, Anna and James N. are deceased. The eldest son, Thomas C., Ph.D., after pursuing theological studies, became a minister of the Gospel. He is a graduate of Princeton University and Princeton Theological Seminary and in addition studied at Harvard University and two years in Berlin and Paris. He has recently been appointed professor in the Pacific Seminary at Berkeley, California. Palmer H., another son, is secretary of the Watt Mining Car Wheel Company. Owing to his excellent business ability, in the spring of 1902, he was promoted and at that time became secretary of this large manufacturing establishment.

While yet a resident of Guernsey County, Mr. Laughlin first became connected with the political history of that county. He was nominated three times for Representative and subsequently had bestowed upon him the highest honor of his county. In the fall of 1873, he was elected State Senator on the Democratic ticket, and served his term to the entire satisfaction of his constituents. He has also served as trustee of the Children's Home, being appointed by the county commissioners. His ambition gratified, he voluntarily withdrew from the political field, and since that time his interests have been identified with an agricultural community. He owns a beautiful and well-improved farm, a short distance from Barnesville, and of late years he has not sought publicity of any kind. Although is residence is of modern make, his home life is simple and unostentatious. He carries on general farming and is quite an extensive stock raiser.

The career of John W. Laughlin is a notable one; he has earned every honor bestowed upon him, by unremitting toil and painstaking effort. He ascribes most of the credit of his success to his sound fundamental schooling, and is content to spend his closing years in comfort upon his farm, surrounded by his family and a multitude of friends and neighbors, who delight to do him honor. He is a valued member of Robert Hilles Post, No. 220, G.A.R., of Barnesville, of which he is a past commander. He holds a membership in the First Presbyterian Church, of which he has been an elder for several years. [Source: "Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

LEE, CAPT. ALBERT W., postmaster at Uniontown, Belmont County, and one of the county's representative citizens, is a native of the Buckeye State, born on February 1, 1840, in New Athens, Harrison County. He is a son of William Lee, a grandson of James Lee, Jr., and a great-grandson of James and Isabella (Bascowan) Lee, the latter a daughter of Lord Bascowan, of the north of Ireland.

James Lee, Sr., was evidently a man of wealth and social prominence, indicated by his being received as a son-in-law by a member of the Irish nobility, but, beyond the fact of the alliance, little is known of his movements except of his unfortunate start for America. The family records show that in 1785, James Lee, Sr., in company with his family, including his son James, three brothers, two sisters, three uncles, with their families, one sister-in-law and 33 cousins, embarked on a vessel named "The Faithful Steward," which so far falsified its cognomen as to go to pieces on the shores of Delaware Bay, on its passage from London to Philadelphia, and all the trusting passengers were drowned except James Lee, Jr., his brother's wife, and four cousins, who finally reached land on pieces of wreckage, the ship being scuttled by sailors, as there was a heavy insurance on the ship and cargo.

James Lee, Jr., the grandfather of Captain Lee, was born January 14, 1759, in County Donegal, Ireland, and on March 15, 1792, married Elizabeth Rankin, who was of Scotch-Irish origin, and a native of Fayette County, Pennsylvania. Mr. Lee settled in Chartier's Valley, three miles northeast of Washington, Washington County, Pennsylvania, near the station which now bears the appropriate name of Meadowlands, there rearing his family and living until the time of his death, December 21, 1843, in his 85th year. His son James inherited his farm. The children of James and Elizabeth Lee were nine in number, namely: Thomas, William, Elizabeth, Hugh, Mary, George, Rachel, Samuel and James. Of these - Thomas came to Ohio at an early day, settled near Cadiz, became a man of affairs, and was made judge of the County Court. He owned a large farm northeast of Cadiz and at first conducted a tannery, but later engaged exclusively in farming. He reared a family of three boys and five girls, two of the former becoming ministers. His death occurred in 1855. Elizabeth married a Mr. Buchanan and removed to Illinois, where she reared a family and died some years ago. Hugh married and moved to Oregon, in 1853, settled in the Willamette Valley, where he died in 1884. Mary became Mrs. Heuston and lived and died in Illinois. George married, located in Pomeroy, Ohio, in the jewelry business, and died there. Rachel married Rev. David Thompson and with her husband started west as a missionary, dying at Fort Laramie, on the way to Oregon, in 1853. Samuel married Mary Russell of Washington County and lived and died in Concord, Muskingum County, Ohio; they had one son and five daughters. James lived and died on the old farm in Washington County, Ohio.

Other members of the Lee family were three brothers of great-grandfather James, one of whom settled in Carroll County, Ohio; another, Hugh, settled near Cross Creek, Pennsylvania; and a third, James, who settled near Hickory, in Washington County, Pennsylvania. A distinguished member of another branch of the family of Captain Lee was Gen. Robert E. Lee, who was a descendant of a family of Lees that came from the north of England and settled in Virginia, having gone there about the same time our subject's ancestry went from England to Ireland, thence to America.

William Lee, the father of Captain Lee, was born December 25, 1798, in Washington County, Pennsylvania, and lived there until 20 years of age, learned the tailor's trade, and then went to St. Louis, Missouri, soon after locating at Cadiz, Ohio, where he married Maria Pritchard, daughter of Jesse Pritchard, on March 22, 1824, and worked for a short time at his trade, but later engaged in a mercantile business in Cadiz and New Athens until 1854, when he sold his store and moved to a farm. He remained on this farm, near Loydsville until 1875, when he removed to St. Clairsville and resided in that place until his death on January 8, 1886. Mr. Lee was a man of limited education, but was industrious and energetic and was successful in business. A family of six sons and four daughters was born to William and Maria Lee, as follows: James, born February 27, 1825, never married, lived in New Athens, but died in August, 1899, at the home of his brother, Albert W.; John P., born June 10, 1827, died of scarlet fever on January 19, 1831; Mary, born August 15, 1829, died February 7, 1831, of scarlet fever; Sarah I., born January 7, 1832, died January 25, 1841, of fever; John R., born September 14, 1834, died February 15, 1841, of fever; Jesse, born April 26, 1837, died February 28, 1856, being drowned in Duck Creek, Washington County, Ohio; Albert W., of this biography; Elizabeth M., born December 18, 1842, and died in 1900, married Samuel Hilles, who at different times was sheriff of Belmont County and member of the Legislature - their children consisted of two boys and three girls, one of the former being superintendent of the Juvenile School on the Hudson (New York); Emma N., born September 16, 1845, married Henry N. Moore, of Red Oak, Iowa, where she still resides, having two children living, three being dead; and William Howard, born September 20, 1848, who has been twice married, his first wife being Clara Vickers; he lives near Tacoma, State of Washington, and has six children.

Albert W. Lee, the immediate subject of this sketch, was educated primarily in the common schools in his native county and then attended Franklin College, leaving his studies in order to enlist, as a private, for service in the Civil War, under Capt. Peter Tallman, in Company K, 17th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., for three months and was in the West Virginia campaign during this term. He re-enlisted in Company E, 15th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., for three years, under Capt. Frank Askew, again entering as a private, and saw service in the Army of the Cumberland, under General Buell, in Kentucky, Tennessee, Mississippi and Alabama, taking sick at Iuka and Florence and, after one year of service, was discharged at Nashville. On recovering from the fever which had prostrated him and shortened his second term of service, our subject raised a company of his own, through Wheeling and Union townships, which was accepted and mustered into service as Company E, 170th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., of which Mr. Lee was elected captain.

In the meantime, after his discharge at Nashville, Captain Lee attended Duff's Business College, at Pittsburg, and graduated in March, 1864, taking his company after this to Washington, D.C. The company was assigned to the Valley of Virginia in the summer of 1864, and took part in several battles and skirmishes. Captain Lee's company was engaged in skirmishes with General Early's men at Harper's Ferry, July 6, 1864, and also at Snicker's Gap, in July, 1864, at Winchester, in July, 1864, where General Mulligan was killed and where our subject barely escaped capture, and in all these engagements bore off honors for gallant conduct. After a service of about two years, the company was mustered out, in September, 1864.

After the close of his service, Captain Lee went to Johnson's Island, in the bay, at Sandusky, and took charge of a military store for his cousin, Fulton Moffett, who had the appointment from the government as storekeeper for the military post located there; several thousand Confederate prisoners were confined there, the greater number of these being commissioned officers of the Confederate Army. Captain Lee remained there until May, 1865, and then came to his father's farm at Loydsville, soon after being appointed assistant revenue collector for the eight western townships of Belmont County, filling the position under November 23, 1865. This was the date of his marriage of Sarah Lee, daughter of William Lee, who resided near Uniontown, a second cousin of Captain Lee's father. With his wife he settled on a farm two miles north of Uniontown and there engaged in farming and extensive stock raising, making a specialty of sheep, and figuratively changing his sword into a ploughshare. In January, 1898, Captain Lee bought two stores in Uniontown and also purchased the Dunbar corner-lot property, consolidating the stores, and operated the business until 1901, when he sold it to his son Charles P. Lee, who later sold to Everett C. Taylor, who conducts the business, although the property still belongs to Charles P. Lee.

The children born to Capt. and Mrs. Lee numbered four, namely: William D., Annie Marie, Charles P. and Robert Vance. William D. Lee was born April 3, 1867, and married Bessie Dunbar, their two children, Marjory and Frances, being born respectively in 1898 and 1900. Mr. Lee was thoroughly educated at Franklin College, at New Athens, and now resides on a farm within one and one-half miles of Uniontown. Annie Marie Lee was born August 11, 1869, was educated at Franklin College, and died February 18, 1897. Charles P. Lee was born April 8, 1871, married Birdie Taylor and they have one little daughter of four years, named Martha, and reside at Bannock. Robert Vance Lee was born January 2, 1875, and married Lucy Perry, a daughter of O.H. Perry, of Cadiz, Ohio, a descendant of Commodore Perry. Mr. Lee resides in Meadville, Pennsylvania, a jeweler by trade, and his one child, Mary Enita, was born in February, 1891, in Durango, Colorado.

Although a Republican in his political sympathy, a son of a father who was an Abolitionist or Free-Soiler, Captain Lee has not taken of late years a very deep interest in public matters, aside from local affairs. He has faithfully served his locality in a number of offices, has been justice of the peace and has been frequently urged to accept political positions, but since 1892 has never consented to become a candidate. Since May 19, 1898, he has been postmaster at Uniontown, appointed through Charles Emory Smith under the administration of the late President McKinley, and has made one of the best officials the people of this section have ever had. Since taking charge, the office has been raised to a money order office and business has increased five per cent. For many years he has shown his interest in educational matters by serving on the School Board. In religious life, Captain Lee has always been identified with the Presbyterian Church, was reared in its teachings, his father being one of the elders, and nearly all of his family are still in active membership in the Bannock Presbyterian Church, although our subject has practically, in late years, withdrawn on account of difference of opinion. He has been superintendent of this Sunday-school and taught the Young Ladies' Bible Class for a long period and has taken an active interest in the Young People's meetings. His present attitude is that of a firm believer in the essential truths of Christianity, but he does not feel that he can hold with some of the beliefs which have crept into the church. Few men know the Bible more thoroughly or follow its precepts more conscientiously, and his views on life and its religious duties and privileges are held by many other thoughtful persons. ["Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

LEE, ELLIS P., editor and publisher of the Barnesville Enterprise, which is one of the leading local papers of Eastern Ohio, was born in Berks County, Pennsylvania, August 16, 1842, and is a son of James and Lydia Lee, of Berks County.

Mr. Lee was born in the same house (which is still standing) in which Daniel Boone was born, and by intermarriage of his ancestors with the Boone family is distantly related to the noted Kentucky hunter. He can also trace his ancestors back more than fifteen hundred years, by the marriage of his great-grandfather to the daughter of Edward and Eleanor Foulke, descendants of the royal families of England and Wales. The genealogical tables of the Foulke family show different lines of descent from about 300 A.D., through Edward I, William the Conqueror, and the various kinds of Great Britain, down to the time the Foulkes came to this country in 1698 and settled at Gwynedd, Pennsylvania.

In 1861 Mr. Lee graduated with honor from Westtown Boarding School, the well-known school of the Society of Friends, near Westchester, Pennsylvania, and then engaged in teaching school in his native county, later following this profession in Columbiana County, Ohio. Mr. Lee subsequently took a commercial course and graduated from Crittenden's Commercial College, in Philadelphia; in 1867 he moved to Barnesville where he entered the First National Bank as its bookkeeper, and was later placed in the responsible position of cashier. His faithful and efficient service in this capacity continued through nine years, and upon resigning this position he engaged, for a short time, in the nursery business.

It was in 1878 that Mr. Lee first became connected with the Barnesville Enterprise, entering as its foreman and local editor, and it was soon realized by himself and friends that this congenial work promised great success. In October, 1888, Mr. Lee and wife purchased the property and good will, and under their management the paper has gained in popularity until at present it is a welcome visitor in almost every home in the city. Mr. Lee has shown excellent business ability and is a writer of force and character; he is able to present the local news in most pleasing form, and vigorously champions all progressive and laudable enterprises. In his work he is ably assisted by the talented lady who is his wife.

In 1869 Mr. Lee was united in marriage with Octa M. Dove, who is a daughter of John and Maria Dove, both of whom are natives of Maryland, and were among the early settlers in Barnesville. Two children were born to Mr. and Mrs. Lee, namely: Laura D., who died in 1883, and Charles E., who resides with his parents. Both our subject and wife are active members of the Methodist Church and are prominent in the social life of the city. For a number of years Mr. Lee has been a member of the Masonic fraternity, and belongs to Friendship Lodge, No. 89, F. & A.M., and Barnesville Chapter, No. 69, R.A.M. [Source: "Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]LEWIS, JOHN IRA, of Lamira, Goshen township, Belmont County, is employed in the double occupation of farming and milling, in which he has met with profit and prosperity. He was born October 10, 1845, in Monroe County, Ohio, and is a son of Charles W. and Lydia A. (Gregg) Lewis.

Charles W. Lewis was born in the Keystone State August 13, 1818, and was a son of Isaac and Mary Lewis; the former was born in 1774 and died in 1843. Charles W. Lewis followed farming all his life, except a few years when he was engaged in mercantile pursuits in Monroe County, Ohio. During his youthful days he wagoned over the mountains, and was a resident of his native county until 1844; in that year he removed to Monroe County, Ohio, and thence to Belmont County in 1850, where he purchased his farm in Goshen, Smith and Richland townships, and resided upon it until his death. He owns 75 acres in both Goshen and Smith townships and 57 acres in Richland township, all of which he improved to the best of his ability. On February 14, 1840, Mr. Lewis was united in marriage at Plainfield Friends' Meeting with Lydia A. Gregg, who was born in Belmont County in August, 1819, and their union was blessed with eight children, six of whom are living at the present time. Both Mr. and Mrs. Lewis were members of the Society of Friends. Mr. Lewis was school director for a number of years, but declined any other office. His death took place November 27, 1888; his wife's demise occurred a few years later. Both were people of integrity and industry, widely known and well-to-do, and at their deaths they left very few, if any, who entertained anything but the best of feeling toward them.

Our subject's brothers and sisters are as follows: John G. and Mary, both of whom died when but two years of age; Isaac W., who is a merchant of Logan County, Ohio, born June 20, 1841, married Ella Stewart and has three children - Frank, Roy and May; John Ira is the subject of this sketch and his record appears below; William H., born December 24, 1851, is a resident of Philadelphia, where he has been engaged in business as a wool commission merchant for 25 years; Mary A. married David Cratty, a glass manufacturer of Findlay, Ohio, and has a daughter, Nellie, born January 16, 1886; Julia E., born May 10, 1857, married Frank B. Wilkinson, who resides in Logansport, Indiana, and has two children, Charles W. and Grace A.; and Charles Sherman, born August 12, 1864, who married Miss M. Wengt, has one son, C.W., born in 1899, and resides in Findlay Ohio, where he is engaged in the glass business.

John Ira Lewis received his education in the common schools of Belmont County and worked on the farm until he was 16 years of age. At this time the Civil War commenced to threaten the Union, and in May, 1862, he enlisted in the three months' service as a member of Company A, 85th Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., and was sent to guard Rebel prisoners at Camp Chase, where he remained until the expiration of his term of service. While he was serving as a guard during this three months' service, a call was made for volunteers from the ranks to go to Kentucky to take care of John Morgan and his marauding band. Mr. Lewis, with a number of his comrades, responded. At another time a call was made for volunteers to go to Covington, Kentucky, to hold the place against Gen. Kirby Smith. Mr. Lewis again responded, and after his duty was over there and he returned to Camp Chase, he found that the other members of the company had been mustered out quite a while before and had gone home. He also returned home, after serving 15 days over his term of enlistment. This did not finish his war experience, however, for in February, 1864, he re-enlisted as a member of Company D, 43rd Reg., Ohio Vol. Inf., and continued in the service until the close of the conflict. His first battle was experienced May 13 to 15, 1864, in the conflict before Resaca, Georgia, the starting of the Atlanta campaign. He also participated in all of the battles of the campaign until the surrender of Atlanta, and then marched with General Sherman to the sea, then through the Carolinas on to Petersburg, thence to Richmond and to Washington City, where in the grand review that followed he spent the happiest days of his life. From Washington, he proceeded to Louisville, Kentucky, where he was on guard duty for a time and afterward was ordered to Columbus, Ohio, and was mustered out of service on July 17th, just in time to return to his home by July 19th, where his parents, his paternal grandmother and his maternal grandparents were all waiting to welcome him.

Mr. Lewis began life as a farmer in the summer and a teacher in the winter months, and he continued agricultural pursuits from 1870 until November, 1900, the latter year being the date of his purchase of the Belmont Roller Mills, which he has since operated in connection with the farm work. The farm consists of 150 acres, from which the coal has been sold, so it is devoted to general farming. The mill is one of the latest and most improved model roller mills, is 80 by 90 feet and four stories high. Mr. Lewis buys and grinds the grain and feed and his mill is as neat and clean as any place of its kind in the county. The capacity is about 60 barrels in 24 hours, and most of the flour is shipped to the East.

March 3, 1870, Mr. Lewis was united in marriage with Mary J. Parks, a daughter of William and Maria (Campbell) Parks, and a great-granddaughter of John Nichol, whose history is given in another part of this work. The union has been blessed with eight children, three dying in infancy. The others are: Harry W., born April 3, 1871, who runs the farm with his father; Della M., born September 30, 1874, now Mrs. George K. Phillips, who has two children, Nellie M. and William; and Charles W., born February 19, 1880; Anna B., born October 23, 1881, and William Parks, born August 13, 1885, who are living at home. Mr. and Mrs. Lewis are members of the Presbyterian Church. In fraternal circles the husband is a member of the Grand Army of the Republic. In politics he takes an active interest, and is now trustee of his township, to which office he was elected two years ago by his party. All the citizens of Lamira have the highest opinion and friendship for Mr. Lewis and his worthy wife. ["Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens", edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

LEWIS, JOHN MILTON. Among the leading citizens of Belmont County, Ohio, John Milton Lewis occupies a prominent position. As president of the First National Bank of Barnesville; as the founder, secretary and general manager of the Barnesville Window Glass Factory; as one of the promoters of many of the public-spirited enterprises of the city, and as an influential and social figure, Mr. Lewis has been conspicuously identified with the progress and development of Barnesville for the past 30 years.

Mr. Lewis comes of Welsh ancestry. His family record reaches far back into the past. From a history of Delaware County, Pennsylvania, compiled by George Smith, we learn:

"Henry Lewis emigrated to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, from Wales in 1682, bringing with him his father, Evan Lewis, supposed to have been born in 1622, and his son, Henry Lewis. Henry (1) was known as the friend and correspondent of William Penn. He was foreman of the first grand jury that ever sat in Philadelphia."

Henry Lewis (1) settled on a tract of 600 acres of land in the northeast part of Haverford township, Delaware County, about six miles from what was then Philadelphia. This property has long since passed out of the hands of the family. It was once owned by the grandfather of Gen. George B. McClellan, and in 1878 by a Philadelphia merchant by the name of Ashurst.

Henry Lewis (1) died in 1688. His three children were: Henry (2), Samuel and Elizabeth. Henry Lewis (2) married a daughter of Joseph Hays in 1693, and their five children were: Isaac, John, Elizabeth, Samuel and Jacob. John Lewis, son of Henry (2), married Catharine Roberts, daughter of Abel and Mary Roberts, at Radnor Monthly Meeting, near Philadelphia. Their seven children were as follows: Abel, Mary, Samuel, Rachael, John, Evan and Elizabeth. Samuel Lewis of this family married Catharine Hoag and died in 1810. They had eight children, namely: Henry, Samuel, Jacob, John, Isaac, Jehu, Elizabeth and Beulah.

Jacob Lewis, the third son of Samuel and Catharine (Hoag) Lewis, was born in Berks County, Pennsylvania, October 12, 1760, and died October 8, 1829, at his home at Lewis' Mills, Belmont County, Ohio. Mary Lewis, wife of Jacob Lewis, was a daughter of Joshua Bundy and was born near New Bern, North Carolina, April 10, 1777, and died November 7, 1859. They had a family of seven children, namely: Hannah, Rachael, Ira, Abel, Reece, and two children, Evan and Mary, who died in infancy.

Abel Lewis, son of Jacob and Mary Lewis, and Lucinda M. Gregg, daughter of Stephen and Asenath Gregg, were married by Friends' ceremony in Plainfield Meeting House early in 1835. To them were born four children, namely: John Milton, Reece G., Stephen Albert and Juliet C., all of whom were born on a farm near Lewis' Mills, where all grew to maturity except Stephen Albert, who died December 20, 1861.

Abel Lewis was born in Mount Pleasant township, Jefferson County, Ohio, June 2, 1810, and died while on a visit at the home of his daughter, Juliet C. Dove, in West Liberty, Iowa, on December 21, 1866. His remains were brought to his home at Barnesville, Ohio, and interred in the Southern Cemetery.

Lucinda M. Lewis, the mother of our subject, was born May 17, 1807, and died December 22, 1861, two days after the death of her son, Stephen Albert, and both lie buried at Plainfield, Ohio.

A second marriage of Abel Lewis took place on August 26, 1863, at Flushing, Ohio, by Friends' ceremony, to Hannah W. Hirst, who died October 22, 1886.

Rebecca B. Holloway, daughter of Samuel and Sarah Holloway, of Flushing, Ohio, was united in marriage to John Milton Lewis November 16, 1858.

Three children were born to this union: Alice Holloway, Estella Z. and Mary Sharp, all born in Belmont, Ohio, where our subject and his wife located after marriage, he engaging in the dry goods business.

From 1865 to 1871 Mr. Lewis was engaged in the wholesale grocery business in Philadelphia, and from 1871 to 1881 was in the same business in Barnesville, Ohio. In 1883 he, with others, organized the Barnesville Window Glass Company, with which he has been since connected in the capacity of secretary and general manager.

Mary Sharp Lewis, daughter of John Milton and Rebecca B. Lewis, was married to Robert Ross Watt, June 11, 1891. They have since lived in Barnesville and he, at present, is president of the Watt Mining Car Wheel Company. [Centennial History of Belmont County, Ohio, and Representative Citizens, edited by A.T. McKelvey, 1903 - Tr. by K. Mohler]

LEWIS, THOMAS L. -- national vice-president of the United Mine Workers of America, is a man of powerful and original individuality, and in the labor circles in the country is known as one of the best organizers. He was born at Locust Gap, Pennsylvania, July 25, 1865, a son of Thomas and Mary J. (Jones) Lewis, both of whom were born in Wales.

The paternal grandparents of Mr. Lewis were Thomas and Margaret Lewis, natives of Wales, who reared a family of nine children, two of these still surviving. The grandmother died in Wales, and the grandfather at the age of 71 years married a second time and immigrated to America.

Thomas John Lewis, his son and the father of our subject, was born in South Wales, May 15, 1834, and died February 7, 1883. Until he was 18 years of age he followed farming, and then became a miner, continuing in that occupation through life. In his native country, on February 13, 1860, he married Mary J. Jones, and in 1864 they immigrated to America, locating first at Locust Gap, Pennsylvania, where they lived two years, and then moved to the coal regions of Luzerne County, Pennsylvania. In 1879 Mr. Lewis moved to Perry County, Ohio, and died at Shawnee, in the Hocking Valley coal district, at the age of 49 years, leaving his widow with 10 children, eight sons and two daughters, all of whom are still living. Mr. Lewis was a member of the Methodist Church and a man of industrious life and exemplary habits.

On October 7, 1889, the family removed to Martin's Ferry. With the assistance of her two eldest sons, Mrs. Lewis had undertaken the task of rearing this large family to honorable and respected maturity, and nobly did she accomplish it. It would be a pleasant task for the biographer to place before the readers of this volume a record of the achievements of this most estimable woman. She has been permitted to see the reward of her sacrifices and self-denials in the establishment of this family of fatherless children in respected, and in some cases, in prominent positions in life. Her 14 children bore these names: William T., Margaret, Thomas L., Ann, Lewis C., John H., Margaret, Llewelyn (1), Llewelyn (2), David, Isaac, Mary J., Stephen and Elias. Of these, Margaret died an infant in Wales; Llewelyn (1), Daniel and Mary J. also died in infancy.

William T. Lewis, the eldest son of the family, who is now a successful attorney in Columbus, Ohio, for many years was very prominently connected with labor movements not only in Ohio and Pennsylvania, but through many of the other States. His ability brought him to the front in the earlier organizations, and during the period when he occupied the position of general master workman of District No. 135, Knights of Labor, he was chiefly instrumental in combining and bringing about the consolidation of mine-working societies into the union which is known to the world as the National Progressive Union of Mine Workers. He was selected as national secretary. On account of his peculiar fitness, he was selected to make a tour of this country in the interests of the miners, serving thus for six months. He then resigned in order to become a member of a commission formed to represent the miners' interests at the Paris Exposition. This was known as "The Scripps-McCrea League Expedition," and was composed of 40 representatives of American labor organizations, its object being to stud