Belmont Chronicle

W. A. HUNT,.

Editor and Proprietor.

Published Every Thursday

ST. CLAIRSVILLE & NORTHERN R'Y,

OPERATED BY

The St. Clairsville Company.

Time Schedule of Train, in effect Hay 15th, 1887

Standard Time, which is S6 minute slower than

local Time.

v SOUTH BOUND.

No. 11 N.U No. 15

am am p m

Lv St Clairsville. 7 00 II SO 4 05

' Barton 7 15 K07PM4 25

Pasco J 25 12 18 4

Ar Bridgeport 7 40 t 4 SO

NORTH BOUND.

No U

No.lJ

am p m pm

Lr Bridgeport ,. JW.

Pasoo ... 125

Barton W Hi

Ar .St Clairsville 10 . 1 &S ft)

V- Oossxcnoss. At Burton with all panger

. trains on the C. L. & W. K"y; at Bridgeport with C.

A P. R'y for Bellaire, Martin's Ferrjr, Pittsburgh,

and other point East and W.

5M A. C. DABHAH. Manager.

Town and Country.

OatmkaL and milk is a good disb for

a summer breakfast.

Binder Twine tor sale by.

tf. McBride Bros.

The Harrison county Democratic con

vention is to be held at Cadiz, August

29th.

Key. Tiios. Balph has erected a nice

new barn iu tlie place of tbe one taken

by the cyclone.

Tub weather during the past week

baa been more favorable for makiDg

corn than bay.

A new edition of tbe potato bug,

bound In stripes, is damaging tbe potato

crop In Illinois.

ThE Lewis Woodmaosee property was

not sold by tbe Sheriff on Monday, there

being no bidJers.

No teacher, can afford to miss Lan?

guase Lessons, as given by Sup't Jones,

at the coming Normal.

Or... "V Om....1ll Aw,awxrra an Una,

complaint? Stuloh V italizer is guaranteed to

cure you. At Patterson & Sons'.

A fink stallion valued at $500, be

longing to Augusl Bridenstein, of

Bridgeport, died on Friday night.

Twentt-fouh probationers were re

ceived into full membership at the 1st

M. E. church, Bellaire, on Sunday.

The Presbyterians of Bridgeport, are

tearing down their old church building

Injured by Ore recently, preparatory to

rebuilding.

Prunes Fine French and Turkish

prunes for 6ife per lb, just in; also, rais

ins and currauts. Geo- Jepson. 2l

Let Intoxicating liquors severely

alone. It is a fact that the large major

ity of people overcome by tbe heat are

bard drinkers.

Me. E. J. Lewis, of Portland, O., has

Invented an Automatic AirBrake.whicb

promises to be superior to anything of

tbe kind now in use.

No lite teacher can afford to be

absent from tbe Institute at Flushing,

to begin ou the 25th iost.

The Belmont Division K. of P., of

Bridgeport, go to New Philadelphia, to

participate in tbe dedication ceremonies

of a new Pythian temple.

Paper doors are coming into use, and

are said to be superior to wood, possess

ing tbe advantage of neither warping,

shrinking, cracking or swelling.

IVn A t new M finmatrtinfT nnv fnr

breakfast, dinner aDd tea; also Tapioca,

Rolled Oats, Avena, Carolina rice.&c&c.

7-21 2t - Geo. Jepson.

Wm. Gtllilakd a farmer well koown

in tbe western section of this county,

diod at bis. homo near Fairview, on the

llin inst, after a long and painful ill

ness from rheumatism, aged 72 years.

Mr. Theo. B. Hibbs, of Smyrna, is a

prominent candidate for Probate Judge

in Guernsey county. He is a wide

awake Republican and would fill tbe bill

for capability and honesty. His numer

ous friends in Belmont would be pleased

to bear of tbe success of bis candidacy.

Flag Soap "Tbe great favorite," is

the bent 'and cheapest; a really line en

graving 22x28 for 25 wrappers. Call and

see soap and engraving. It beats the

world. Geo. Jepson. 7-21 2L

The roofers are at work on that part

of tbe Welday Block destroyed by the

tornado, and in a few days the damage

done by tbe storm will be repaired.

The repair of that block finishes up tbe

repairs of damage done by tbe tornado

in town. The upper floor, over Troll's

store room and the First National Bank,

will be arranged for offices.

DISTRIBUTION OF SEEDS.

Cambridge, O, July 11, 1887.

The first seeds allotted me for distri

bution have been received, and 1 now

bave 500 papers of tornip seed which I

shall send to residents of tbe district

who request the same by postal card.

J. D. Taylor, M. C. 17th Ohio Dist

Drummond Post 203, of St. Clairs

ville, will bold its next meeting on

Tuesday evening August 2d, for the

purpose of Mustering Recruits and to

close the Polls on tbe Pension Bill Re

port of tbe National committee. Also,

to make further arrangements for at

tending tbe Island Reunion, August 26.

. Rev. W. A. Williams, who was re

cently elected President of Franklin

College, bas accepted tbe position, and

will enter actively upon its duties and

in working up the interests of the col

lege. Tbe Rev. is a comparatively yoonir

man, full of energy, and will do bis ut

most to put new life into tbe famous

old institution. He Is a forcible talker

and exceedingly pleasant gentleman.

Thb usual treatment of catarrh is very tin-

pMistiKwrjfM .uuusauua in uespainrjg patients

can testily: on this point a trustworthy med-

leal writer says; 'Proper local treatment is

positively necessary to success, but many, if

not most, of the remedies in general used bv

physicians afford but temporary benefit; a cure

certainly cannot be expected from snuffs,

powders, douches and washes.' Ely's Cream

isaim is a remedy which combines the im

portant requisites of quick -action, specific

curative power with perfect safety and pleas

antness to tne patient. 14-SJt

NEW SCHEDULE.

The popular B. & O. will change time

Sunday, July 17, 12:1 p. m. Trains will

leave &u uiairsviue as follows, on (Jen

tral standard Time 6:00 a. na.. 11.30 a.

m. and 4:10 n. m. Returning, nrrivn In

St. ClairsviTle 9 :00 a. m., 2:30 p. m. and

o:40 p. re All these trains will make

cioae connections to ana iromnttsDurgn

IWinnino- Snnrlav Jnlv 17th. thn R

&O. will run a Sunday church train

airecr, to uornbrook s Park, Wheeling-

leaving St. Clairsville at 6:00 a. m., ar

riving in Pittsburgh at 9:00 a. m; re

turning, leave Pittsburgh at 4.-00 p. m.

arriving at St. Clairsville 7 p. m. This

train will allow travelers 10 hours in

Wheeling and 7 hours in Pittsburgh

Tickets at excursion rates on sale.

C. W. Troll, Ag't.

W. E. RErpEKT, Div. Paes. Ag't

A SAD SUICIDE.

LEWIS WOODMANSEE SHOOTS HIMSELF

THROUGH THE BRAIN, AND DIES

WITHIN FORTY MINUTES.

Lewis Woodmansee shot himself

through the brain, at bis heme near

Bridgeport, about 8 o'clock Sunday

morning, and died within forty minutes.

It is supposed the act was the result of

mental aberration, caused by financial

trouble, and, possibly, to some extent by

an occurrence of several days ago. At

tbat time Mr. Woodmansee was sitting

on the portico in front of bis bouse

during a very heavy thunder storm. Tbe

air was heavily charged with electricity

and after a bard crash Mrs. Woodman

see prevailed upon hi m to go into the

bouse. He complained of severe pain

in tbe top of bis bead, and pressed it

and groaned in his misery. There is a

probability that the concussion of that

explosion affected bs brain, and assisted

in unsettling him at all events peculi

arilies were observed after that which

created grave apprehensions in the

minds of members of bis family.

On the morning of tbe suicide Mrs.

Woodmansee left her husband in bed,

and wbile sitting at tbe breakfast table

beard a crack which she mistook for a

fire-cracker. Her son, Frank, went up

stairs to investigate, and was horrified

to find bis father lying across the bed,

with a ghastly wound in the temple, and

unconscious. Drs. Fisber and Cook (of

Bridgeport) were hastily summoned, but

tbe suicide never regained conscious

ness and died in about forty minutes. '

Deceased was well known throughout

this couoty. He was a son of tbe late

Joseph Woodmansee, and married tbe

only child of the late Samuel Lewis.

Prior to tbe war he resided for a time at

Sparta. Wisconsin. Returning to SL

Clairsville, he went into the army, as

First Lieutenant of company B, Ninety

eighth infantry, and alter returning

from the war eagaged in the hotel busi

ness with Mr. Lewis at St Clairsville for

a year or two, and from thence they

went to Wheeling, buying tbe Monroe

House property.wbich was enlarged and

greatly improved and christened tbe

tiraut House. Financially, this step

was not successful, and it culminated in

tbe destruction of the bouse by fire.

Mr. Woodmansee was a member of

the Grand Army of tbe Republic, Ma

sonic fraternity, tbe Knights of Honor,

and the National Council It is report

ed tbat be carried heavy life insurance

policies.

THE FUNERAL.

The remains reached town about 2

o'clock Tuesday afternoon, accompanied

by a goodly number of relatives and ac

quaintances, and were interred alongside

bis father, in tbe Union Cemetery.

Marshal Buffinoton bas been pros

trated for several weeks with a spell of

sickness, and in tbe meantime tbe du

ties of bis office bave been discharged by

Deputy Marshal Ducker. Most persons

have thought the town was getting

along reasonably well ; but not so the

Mayor. Accordingly, a few days ago be

called upon tbe Marshal and demanded

bis resignation, and be wanted it bad,

and wanted it quick, too. Of course be

did not get it.

To all persons except the Mayor this

seems a very bigb-banded proceeding.

The Marshal is an elective officer, and

the Mayor has no more authority to de

mand bis resignation than -the Marshal

bas to call for bis.

The Tuscarawas Advocate says: Dr.

J. A. Spence, of this city, (New Phila

delphia) formed a partnership with Dr.

J. A. Qobson, of Flushing, Belmont

county, Ohio, and left to-day, Wednes

day, for that place. Dr. Spence gradua

ted at tbe Miami Medical College, Cin

cinnati, Ohio, last March, and took the

honors of bis class for standing tbe best

general examination. He is an indus

trious student a young man of fine at

tainments and excellent character. We

heartily commend him to the people of

Flushing and Belmont county, as in

every way worthy of their highest es

teem and confidence. Dr. Spence's ma

ny friends in New Philadelphia, wish

and predict for him a very successful

future.

The political Prohibitionists at their

convention in Bellaire on Wednesday of

last week, nominated the following

ticket:

For Representatives Jacob Maule.of

Colerain township, and R. S. Clark, of

Union township.

Probate Judge Stephen Gressinger,

of Bellaire.

County Treasurer A. P. White, of

Belmont

Prosecuting Attorney J. A. Gallaber,

of Bellaire.

County Commissioner John Watson,

of Wheeling township.

Infirmary Director W. H. Blackford,

of Pease township.

. Four of tha nominees were former

Democrats, and three Republicans.

iei i

The new hotel at Flushing, built by

Mr. James Foley, is completed and fur

nished, and is handsome and complete

in all its appointments. The furnishing

is elegant, and embraced in it is a large

cooking range and a piano. Tbe dining

room is one of the pleasantest we were

ever in. Tbe bouse is a monument to

its enterprising builder, and a credit to

tbe town.

Tbe above named botel.under Mr.Knox

Gregory, will open this (Thursday) eve

ning, with a grand ball and supper. A

number of the young society people of

this place and Cadiz will be among those

in attendance.

The August number of Scribner's

Magazine is a valuable one. Its table

of contents is particularly attractive.

The Tbackery articles are continued

and the great interest in them is main

tained. 'A Girl's Life Eighty Years

Ago,' being selections from the letters

of Eliza Soutbgate Brown, is very read

able. The 'Instability of tbe Atmos

phere.' by N S Shaler, is a One article.

Aria Bates has sometbiug to sav about

'Realism and the Art of Fiction' tbat is

worth reading. The number is reada

ble and instructive from beginning to

end. New York: Charles Scribner's

Sons, publishers.

The St. Nicholas for August is out

Its frontispiece is a fine poem by Edith

M. Thomas, entitled 'Ech-of An inter,

eating sketch of 'The Boyhood of Oliver

Wendell Holmes' follows. Frank Demp

ster Sherman bas a fine poem on 'Aug

ust' Chapter second of Hjalmar Hjorth

Boyesen's'Fiddle-Jobn's Family' is very

entertaining. General Adam Badeau

contributes a splendid illustrated article

on 'A Great Battle in a Forest' The

whole number, iu fine, is full of good

things for young and old. New York:

The Century Company.

Taw rAmnvnt nf i.h Ohin T.antArn

works from Bellaire to Findlay, will

'alte Booui nity persons irom iseuaire,

the most of whom are employed in tbe

farlnrv. Thn oimiunv has erntpd at

its new location a fine factory build

ing rour stories nign, ioux-iu ieei in size.

NOTICE.

Tbe undersigned, surviving partner of

tbe firm of H. West & Son, will contin

ue the business at the old stand and un

der the same firm name. He is author

lzed to make collections and settle tbe

business of tbe late firm, and all those

indebted are requested to makeircmedl

ate oavment. Thanking the communi

ty for tbe liberal ' share of patronage

heretofore extended, we respectf ally so

licit a continuance of tbe same.

7 28 3t Jno. E. West.

Musquitoes are more plentiful than

usual this year.

The indications are tbat corn will be

king tbis year it is fairly booming.

Thanks, awfully thanks. Weather

Clerk, for tbe cool wave and refreshing

rain.

Cunrrp. Whnnninir Oouirh and Bronchitis

unmediatelv relieved Dv ttiuton s uure. ooio

by ratersoo 3c Boar.

Aroi-t nlnetv Wheeling and ten Bell

aire families are camping on the Mounds

vine camp grounds.

Every live, wide awake teacher in

tbe county will be in attendance at tbe

Normal Institute at Flushing.

A rniRTPB ha hppn granted to

o .

WhAAlirxr ramnanv fnr thfl mnstruction

of an electrical street railway in that

tu-v TT -T arts, a former Belmont

county boy, is now the leading cartoon

ist on the Cincinnati commercial gaz

ette.

R f! rsTn. a former well known

rtriilo-ennrt altnrnev. is said to be doinz

a la,rge real estate business at Abelene,

Kansas.

Daily instruction will be given in

penmanship and school law, by Sup't

Walters, at the JNormai institute at

Flushing.

The JEtna Iron and Steel Works, at

BrldgeporLwitb a capital stock of $200,-

000, bave declared a semi-annual divi

dend of 4 per cent.

Shiloh's Vitalizik is what you need for

constipation, loss of appetite, dizziness and all

symptons of dyepepsia; price 10 and 75 cents

per bottle. At Pattersons';

During tbe absence of Rev. B. H.

Lee, of tbe A. M. E. church, Bellaire,

at camp meeting in Barnesville, his little

son died ou Saturday night.

It is positivelv announced tbat Henry

George will be president at the great

labor demonstration in Wheeling on

Saturday, and make a speech.

James F. Carroll, a job printer In

the Opera House block. Wheeling, made

an assignment on Monday, to J. C. Her-

vey, for the beneht of cieditors.

The Probate court has bad a dull

week in the marriage license business,

but one permit having been given,

that of Charles W. Burris and Nancy A.

Filley.

"Our Flag is still there" Flag

Soap has come to stay the handsomest

purest, best 5c cake of soap in town. A

beautiful engraving 22x28, for 25 wrap

pers. See small bills.

7 21 2t GEO. J EPSON.

The Cadiz Camp meeting occurs from

the 10th to the 17th of August Dr. J.

M-Thoburn, the well known missionary.

will be in attendance a portion of the

time.

The Democrats hereabouts did not

enthuse greatly over tbe nominations of

their State Convention last .week. The

only ones who attempted to look cheer

ful were those in oflice, or their hangt

ers on.

People who object to having their

bad doings mentioned In the papers

have the remedy in their own hands. It

is to "let up" on practices 'that render

their doings matters of public interest

or comment

It is estimated that tbe total produo

tion of gas in the Washington oil field

since January 16.85, was about 4,500,000

barrels. Of this amount all but about

12.000 barrels bas been produced in

1886 and 1887.

Ira Lewis one of tbe oldest and best

known citizens of Smith township, who

was very seriously ill from general pros

tration, last week, was somewhat better

at last reports, with prospects favorable

to his recovery.

Camp meeting will begin at Mouuds

ville on Wednesday of next week, and

continue ten days. Rev. Sam Small

will be among tbe speakers, and the

music will be conducted by that sweet

singer, Prof. Lxcell.

Flags! Flags! Never mind the

racket about tbe captured (lags, but

don t fail to try "Flag" Soap, and get

a really handsome engraving 22x28. Call

and see the soap and tbe engravings.

7 21 2t Geo. Jepson.

Frank C. Robinson, of Bridgeport

. A . A J - A A. A.t -.. A. 1IT . TT ' .

late Adjutant oi merirsi west vir

irinla Cavalrv. haa isanpil a pall tn hia

comrades to turn nut and ioin in the

reunion with the Army of West Va, at

wneeiiog, august Ma to 20tn.

The Wheeling Volksbiatt suspended

publication on Thursday and the com

pany engaged in its publication made an

assignment to L. F. Stifel for the bene

fit of creditors, on Friday. The concern

has been financially crippled for a long

time.

Allen Ramsey, an old and esteemed

citizen of Mead township, died on Tues

day of last week, from the effects of an

apoplectic stroke several years ago. In

the 79th year of bis age. He bad been

in failing health fojr a long tima In

terment on Thursday at Jacobsburgb

cemetery.

It bas been years since Barnesville

was as free from drunkenness and row

dyism as it has been during tbe past

few months. While each of the saloons

ou'side of the corporation are no doubt

doing a paying business, not half the

money is squandered fur intoxicants as

there was before the saloons were voted

out of town, according to the Enterprise.

FRANKLIN COLLEGE,

New Athens, O, has recently added to

her usual facilities, a new College Build

ing; (new Society Halls, elegantly fur

nished; a Boarding House for ladies; &

new Curriculum up to the times ; a Com

mercial Course; a Music Department,

and a Normal Department.

W. A. Williams, President,

7-28 tf Demos. O.

EXTENSION OF THE W. &. L. E.

The Directors of the Wheeling and

Lake Erie railway in session in New

York, on Monday, adopted an address to

tbe stockholders, proposing an exten

sion of tbe road from Ho we rs ton, the

present terminus, to Wheeling, making

a through line from Toledo to Wheeling.

The extension will be about 20 miles in

length. The line bas been looked upon

as an exclusively "coal road," but the;

directors anticipate tbat tbe passenger

and general freight traffic will be only

a fulfillment of the original plan, which

was not carried out before on account of

difficulties iu construction.

THE LAST OF EARTH.

The funeral of Stephen Hobson, men

tion of whose death was made lasi

week, was largely attended, many per

sons from distant parts of the county

being present. In the morning a poet

mortem, conducted by Dr. J. F. Hobson.

and a physician of Canal Dover, (whose

name has escaped our memory), reveal

ed the presence of 275 gall stones, rang

ing in size from a grain of wheat to a

buckeye, and of tbe color of a buckeye.

Tbe funeral services were held at lb

Friends' meeting house, wbicb was

closely packed with tbe friends of the

deceased, and very many were unable to

get in. The open coffin laid in the mid

dle of tbe building thirty minutes or

more, in the midst of silence tbat was

almost oppressive, when Hannah Strat

ton, of tbe Friends' boarding school, at

Baroesville, arose and delivered an im

pressive and eloquent address. Then

followed another long silence, when the

venerable Ann Branson arose and, with

trembling bands, but strong and steady

voice, recalled the Seasons of tbe hour in

a forcible manner, after which tbe cof

fin was closed and borne to tbe grave in

tbe plain burying ground. To persons

unused to such burials it was a remark

able spectacle no mourning nor weep

ing, everything plain and without shad

ow of ostentation, but throughout deep

ly impressive and tender.

The property which has heretofore

been occupied by the colored people for

their school and church which was to

have been sold yesterday by the school

board was not sold, because of an in

junction granted by the Probate court

restraining iu sale, upon application of

tbe official board of the A. M. E church

who sets op certain claims in the propt

erty. wbicb attached at the time they

sold their church property a number of

years ago, and under a contract with

the school board, applied the proceeds

of tbe sale to the repairs of this proper

ty. The matter will be adjuticated in

tbe court of common pleas. Hon. L.

Danford and H. M. Davies, bsq- are at

torueys for tbe church.

W. K. Gooderl, a prominent citizen

of Cambridge.died suddenly at Oakland,

Md, on Friday. He bad been suffering'

from nervous prostration for several

months, and went to Oakland a few

weeks ago hoping that the change would

benefit blm. Deceased was formerly

superintendent of the Bellaire public

schools, and afterward was editor for

several years of tbe Guernsey Times.

He was prominent in tbe political af

fairs of bis region, and was influential

in any eause he espoused. He was a

good citizen, whose loss will be keenly

felt by the people of Cambridge. His

remains were taken to bis home for in

terment. Funeral on Sunday.

Evans & Closb, granite and marble work

ers, have completed a sarcophagus cut from a

beautifully clouded piece of marble. It is

handsomely designed and carved, and the

lettering is done with good taste and in keep

ing with all work turned out by this firm.

The stone will mark tbe resting place of the

late Abraham Ramsey in the Jacobsburg

eemetery. His daughter, Mrs. hu Kiley,

made the selection, and we here state that ber

judgment was good. Evans & Close are

leading all other nrms in their line, ana tney

are better prepared to furnish monuments and

headstones than ever, and at prices tbat are

bound to make them go. Their work, erected

in nearly every cemetery in this section,

spsaks volumes for them.

The Harvest Home picnic to be beld

in Stewart's woods, Thursday of next

week the 4tb, promises to be a -big

thing" in its way. The committee in

charge of the affair have spared no

effforts to make it a grand success.

Special rates have been secured to War-

nock's over the B. & O. and by the St.tC.

& N. to St Clairsville, There will be

good vocal and instrumental music and

tbe speaking by former Belmont County

boys Rev. J. D. Momt and Mr. Eras

mus Wilson, of the Pittsburgh Dispatch

will be highly entertaining. Everybody

should turn out and spend a delightful

day in the woods,

Mayor Brown, of Bellaire, has serv

ed notice upon tbe owners of tbe stieet

railway tbat tbe city will not be iespon-

sible for damages for any accident

caused by tbe bad condition of tbe

track of said railway through the city.

Tbe Gazette has received a Campbell

power press, which will be set up in

the basement of the Huffman building.

recently purchased by George Brown,

and which will be occupied by tbat pa

per as an oflice after tbe 1st prox.

Misses May and Zula McBride.daugb-

ters of Mr. Dan McBride, at tbe east

end, gave an enjoyable paity on Friday

evening, in honor of Misses Piper and

Rankin of Bellaire, and Miss Lizzie

Finney.

The colored people are to hold Camp

meeting at Carter's Grove, Aug, 6 to 14,

under tbe auspices of Captina church.

Mrs. M. S. Smith, of Lancaster, Ohio,

will conduct the meeting.

The yield of oats will not be as good

as expected. There is an abundance

of straw, but tbe heads are light; it is

claimed tbat tbe hot weather caused

them to ripen too rapidity.

Mrs. Samuel Lea sure, while stand

ing in the door of her residence, at

Flushing, on Mouday evening,' was

struck by lightning, since which time

she has-been speechless.

The Grand Army Post at Hunter held

a picnic on Saturday music, song,

speeches, anecdote and hard tack, made

up tbe program. Tbe "boys" had a good

time.

The Woodstield Spirit says that W. H.

Bush of Caldwell, purchased 23.000 lbs.

of wool in tbat vicinity last week, at

34 cents per pound. It was XX wool.

A number of tbe gay young society

people of Martin's Ferry, drove out ou

Tuesday, and spent tbe evening at tbe

residence of Treasurer Robiuson .

Andrew Geller, tbe young man

who was shot iu the saloon row last

week, is able to be about again; tbe

wound proved only a flesh wound.

The Sunday B. &0. train from this

place is not liberally patronized. Pub

lic opinion is against tbe necessity oi

such a train.

At a meeting of the managers on Sat

urday it was determined to hold the

Belmont County Fair August SI, Sept.

1 and 2.

Mr. R. M. Collins will enter upon

his duties as superintendent of the

Chagrin Falls schools, Sept. 12.

Deputy Auditor Wise Is busy fig

uring the taxes for 1887, and preparing

the duplicates.

If your neighbor does not take Tns

Chronicle, advise him to subscribe

for it

Doo days until August 2Jth.

"QUIET OBSERVER."

The above is a pretty fair represents.

tion of Mr, Erasmus Wilson, the "Quiet

Observer" of tbe Pittsburgh Dispatch,

who will ba present at tbe Harvest

Home picnic on Thursday of next week,

and make a talk. He was born on Cap-

tina creek in this counts, and began his

newspaper work as a correspondent to

The Belmont Chronicle, He was a

soldier of the 98tb Ohio, and served bis

country with credit. After tbe war be

entered with zeal upon the work of

journalism, being for a time we believe

connected with the Washington, Pa.,

Observer, Later ne accepted a position

on tbe staff of tbe Pittsburgh Dispatch,

which place he has filled d uring the past

dozeo years, preparing under the head

ing of "Quiet Observations," a column

of reading matter each day. He bas

written upon almost every conceivable

topic, treating bis subjects in a quaint

and peculiar way. His articles are an

attractive' feature of the Dispatch, pos

sessing in fact so much merit tbat they

bave been put into book shape, making

a neat volume which is having a wide

circnlation.

Yourself and Neighbors.

Mr. Will While, of Pennsylvania, a

college mate of Mr. John Locbary, at

Cornell, is visiting him at his borne on

Marietta street

Mrs. Morgan, of Harrisville, Is the

guest of ber daughter Mrs. Dr. Furbay.

Jesse Troll, of this place left on

Monday for Denver, Colorada, and oth

er western points.

Mr. VaL Heaton, of the wholesale

notion bouse of Searle.Vanneman & Co.,

of Philadelphia, stepped over bere on

Monday enroote to Chicago, on a brief

visit to his mother.

Mrs. Ross Baird, of Cleveland, came

in Mooday on a visit to ber parents Mr.

and Mrs. Louis Hoff ner.

Miss Ada Martin, of Moundsville,

is the guest of the family of Mr. G. C.

Roberts.

Mr. T. W. Emerson, is spending a

portion of tbe heated term at the borne

of bis father, Wm. Emerson in Goshen

township.

Recorder Beckett, who has been

spending a week at tbe home of bis

mother in Centreville, returned to his

office duties on Tuesday.

A. C. Darrah, John Boroff, David

Darrah and Lit Thompson, went to

Cleveland on Monday: of coarse tbey

will not go near the big races.

Hon. L. Danford and Probate Judge

Gaston left for Toledo on Monday, to

attend the Republican State Convention.

v Prosecuting Att'y N. K. Kennon

returned on Tuesday from a western

tour.

Mrs -C.E. Hughes and little daugh

ters. Bessie and Mamie, af Wheeling.are

visiting St. Clairsville relatives and

friends this week.

D. L. Tboburn, of Bellaire, was

among tbe people in town, Tuesday.

The Secretary of State has incorpo

rated the Cleveland and Wheeling rail

road company, extending through the

counties of Carroll, Harrison, Jefferson,

and Belmont. Tbe termini are in Sber-

rodsville, Orange township, Carroll

county, and Bellaire, Belmont county.

J C Pomerine, John F Fisbsr, E T

Spangler, J W Cassingham, Cbas Blood

and Harry C Herbig are the incorpora

tors. No one in this region bas any

knowledge of tbe plans of the above

company, or whether a railroad Is to be

built in fact or on paper.

Over the Mountains to the Sea

via Picturesque B. & O.

The tbird of tbe series of tbe Balti

more and Ohio popular excursions to

Atlantic City and Cape May, will be run

on Thursday. August 4th. Train will

leave Wheeling at 5 a. m., Ben wood at

5:35 a. m., and reach Philadelphia at

9.-00 p. na., passing in daylight through

the most beautiful mountain and valley

scenery on the continent a fitting pre

lude to a week's sojourn upon the shores

of old ocean.

The round trip rate will be 810 from

both Wheeling and Benwood.

Tbe excursion tickets will be valid

until tbe 13th inclusive, and embrace

tbe privilege of stopping over a day at

Washington on tbe return journey.

For information in detail apply to

ticket agents B. & O. R. R, or to E. D.

Smith, Division Passenger Agent Pitts

burgh, Pa..

WOOL MARKET.

Bradstreets, July 23.

At Boston no change has appeared in the

wool market this week, except that more fre

quent inquiries have been made bymanufac

turera. ' Purchases have not increased to any

extent, both sellers and buyers pursuing a

waiting policy. There is a fair demand for

medium description!; but fine fleeces are neg

lected and weak. Prices in the general range

are unchanged. The sales of the week are re

ported at 1,870,000 pounds against 1,560,000

pounds last week, and 4,628,000 in the same

week last year. The Boston wool market con

tinues dull and easy and in buyers' faror. The

Philadelphia market has continued very quiet.

Mills are buying only for argent wants unless

they can secure sharp coueeesiois, which the

majority of holders are unwilling to make.

Manufacturers are using a good deal of shoddy

and cheap foreign goods. Tins adds to the dull

ness of the market for home-grown wools.

Stocks are light and receipts continue small as

dealers are unwilling to stock up at ruling rates

in tbe interior. Prices at Boston are the same

as last week, except Michigan X, which is 31a

32 cents.

PHILADELPHIA.

Jjlt 26 Wool Quiet and unchanged; Call

fornia, Ohio and Pennsylrania extra fleeces at

33c; aa at 34a35c; No. 1 wools, Ohio at 38c;

Michigan at 3ba37c.

BOSTON.

July 26 Wool Fair and unchanged; Ohio

aud Pennsylvania extra fleeces at 33c; XX at

34aJ5; Michigan extra 32; No. rOhio combing

40c.

Administrator's Notice.

NOTICE is hereby given that in the probate oonrt

of Belmont county, Ohio, the uwlonHKned waa

appointed and qualified att Administrator of the

estate of Baniuel bimeral, dooeaxwl, late of Belmont

county.

All person Indebted to said estate are requested to

make imuuxliate payment, and those having claims

aval list, sain estate wiu present tnera, only aiithenu.

cated for iayiueat. J. M. POWKLL,

7 Adiuinigtrtttor,

" $20,000 worth of Dry Goods,

Carpets, Boots, and Shoes at

your own prices. Goods roill be

sold regardless of cost. Heady

for business to-day, Ihursday,

F. TROLL & SON.

Good Results lu Every Case.

D A Bradford, wholesale paper dealer of

Chattanooga, Tenn., writes, that be was sen

ously afflicted with a severe cold that settled

on bis lungs; bad tried many remedies with

out benefit; being induced to try Dr King's

New Discovery for consumption, did so, and

was entirely cured by use of a few bottles;

since which time he has used it in bis family

for all coughs and colds with best results:

this is the experience of thousands whose

lives bave been saved by this wonderful dis

covery; trial bottles free at Pattersons . 5

Announcements.

REPRESENTATIVE,

To the Republicans of Belmont County:

I hereby announce myself as a candidate for

the nomination for Representative, subject to

the decision of the Con

M. E. PEARSON.

STATE SENATOR.

Mr. Editor: Please announce the name of

Hon. Joax C. Jamisox as a candidate for. the

office of State Senator, subject to the will of

the Joint Senatorial Convention to be held by

the counties of Belmont and Harrison. Mr.

Jamison is a prominent and successful farmer

of Harrison county. He was elected to the

state Senate in lbtij, and served in that capac

ity daring the last two years of the war. Since

that time he Las been an earnest and active

worker for the success of the Republican party

and its candidates.

Editor Chroxicli:

Please announce that Geo. W. Glover, of

Hanson county, is a candidate lor tne otnee

of me State Senator m the 20th Senatorial

District of the State of Ohio, composed of the

counties of Belmont and Harrison. Mr. Glover

served as a private soldier in the late war. ' He

bas been an active partisan Republican all bis

life, and has all the qualifications to make a

goad officer.

KASKINE!

.(THE NEW QUININE)

GIVES

600D APPTITE,

NEW STRENGTH,

QUIET NERVES,

HAPPY DAYS,

SWEET SLEEP.

A POWERFUL TONIC

that the most delicate stomach will bear.

A Specific for Malaria,

Rheumatism,

Nervous Prostration,

and all Germ Disoasea.

THE MOST SCIENTIFIC AND SUCCESSFUL

BLOOD PURIFIER. Superior to quinine.

Catarrhal coition intr crave me dyspepsia, and nerv

ous d rostra tion and malaria followed: I got so re

duced I had to be carried up and down stairs; every

body thouRht 1 would die; three months use 01 &as-

owe my recovery and life itself solely to the use of

this great ana emcient remedy. Mrs r. A oinstocK,

13U east 71st street, new I or.

'Four years of malaria and dyspepsia greatly re

duced mywife's strength and destroyed her health;

a trip to Florida and every known remedy could not

restore her: I heard of Kaskine. and four months'

use broke up the malaria, cured the dyspepsia, re

stored her health, and six months repaired the waste

of tonr vfln.nL I hanncT 1 rims. Aihanv. N. Y.

Xjeners irom we aoove persons, kivuik iuxi uuuib

will be sent on application.

KaskinA can be taken without anv SDecial medical

advice, $1 00 per bottle. Sold by Pattkbson &

Ooms, et. u lairs vuie, umo, or sent oy man on re

ceipt of price, KASKINE CO 54 Warren Su, N. I,

Proposals for Furniture

FOR

Court House and County Offices.

Office of Comicishionebs of Belmont County,

St. CiaAiBSTixiaK, Ohio, July 22, lwtf.

THE Commissioners of Belmontjcounty, Ohio, in

jvite sealed proposals for furnishing the Court

House and uounty unices oi said county, namely:

Common Pleas and Probate court rooms, jury

rooms, witness rooms. Probate offices. Sheriff's

offices. Clerk's offices. Auditor's offices. Recorder's

offices. Treasurer's offices. Prosecuting Attorney's

omce, Commissioners ornce, borveyor g mce,

ProDosals must be accompanied bv designs. All

should be on file at the Auditor's office, St. Clairs

ville, Ohio, on or before Monday hoon, Sept. 5th.

Any information required will be furnished by

the Auditor.

The Commissioners reserve the right to reject any

or all bids.

By order of the County Commissioners.

7 28-td D. H. DARRAH, Auditor.

Executor's Notice.

NOTICE is hereby given that in the probate court

of Belmont county, Ohio, the undersigned were

appointed and qualified as Executors of the estate

of Stephen Hobson, dee'd, late of Belmont county.

All persons indebted to said estate are required to

make immediate payment, and those having claims

against said jglate will present them, duly authenti

cated lor payxfenc iiuwAriu u avtiaut

JOSEPH F. HOBSON,

7 38-8t Executors.

UNIVERSITY OF WOOSTER.

COLLEGIATE. MUSICAL PREPARATORY.

ART and COMMERCIAL DEPARTMENTS folly

equipped, with additional teachers. Now Chair of

Biology. ( 'o-etlucational. Over 600 students. Stan

dard of study ranks with the firstr Modem lang

uages thoroughly taught. Physical culture by Mili

tary drill and Gymnaaium. Karl Merz, Principal of

Musical Dept. THOROUGH EDUCATION AT

MINIMUM EXPENSE. Fail term opens SEPT. 14.

Send for Catalogue. Address the PRESIDENT or

JfcSSIK McCLl'.Ll.A.", Teas., WooHter, o. 7 287

DrirVTCQ I ITS CAUPK4 and a new and

LAI Dbua . successful CUKB at your own

home by one who was deaf 28 rears;

treated by most of tbe noted specialists

with no benefit: cured himself In tbree months

and ainoa tben hundreds of others; foil partlo

lara sent on application. T. 8. PAGE. 41 West

sisisireei, new xorK.

PARKER'S

HAIR BALSAM

tits popular favvrtto for dnasng

th hair, RaCoring mlor whea

aimr, and pravMiOng Dtaanff.

It CM

r, ud i mu to Data,

fso. and $l.otlrffirteta,

HINDERCORN8.

Tbetmfesw, saraat and be imr for Corns, BwUCM,.

top all paia. fanni oomfort to ths fool Hvr talis

tomra. 1 MUsat Jjraaslrta. XUaoox A C MTT.

MARVELOUS

DORY

DISCOVERY.

WHOLLY UNLIKE ART1FICAL SYSTEMS.

Any Book Learned In One Reading.

Tbtfnmmnndd bv Mark Twain. Richard Proctor.

the scientist, Hons. W W Astor, Judah P Benjamin,

Mr Minor, &b. Class of 101) Columbia law students;

two olasties of 200 each at Yale; 40U at University of

Penn. Phila.. and 400 at Wellesley College, A., and

engaged at Chautauqua Univerity; prospectus post

free from Pnor. LOISETTE, 237 Fifth Are., N. Y.

Road Notice.

NOTICE is hereby given that a petition will be

Dresented to the Commissioners of Belmont

oounty, Ohio, at their September meeting, to be

held on Monday. Seuteirber 5lh. 1KK1. praying for

the vacation of so much of the oounty road, aa fol

lows: Leading from the nock Miii and tjeimont

luuirn road to a mart iMulinir from tne uniontown

anil Flushing mscatliunisMl to Hollowav station on

the line of tiie Cleveland, Lorain A Wheeling rail

road commencing on said road at a point about

one hundred and fifty yards northwest of the resi

dence oi w imam Humphrey, Sr., in r lusning town.

ship, in said county, running thence in a general

easterly direction through toe lauds of William

Humphrey, Sr., the C., LAW. Co., John Long, Sr.,

and MoUlon Pickering to a point where saioV road

rh. -...! u I... i . i i . r ....

the Uniontown aud Flushing macadamised road to

Hoi loway station, all of which road is situate in

section two, township ten, range six, and section

thirty-two, of township nine, of range five.

aUBMI' it UBSEl.L, et ai.,

T U-tt Petitioners,

W. A. GEPH ART,

DEALER IN

HARDWARE,

AGRICTJLTTJRAL TOOLS,

HOUSE -BUILDERS' SUPPLIES,

-AND-

HOUSE-FURNISHING GOODS.

SPECIAL. ATTENTION GIVEN TO

Roofing: c? Spouting: 2

I will give my Personal Attention to all Orders for Roofing.

W. A. GEPHART.

PUIUiPS

St. Clairsville, O

7 7,87-tf

Probate Court.

XTOTICE is hereby given that the following nam.

LI ed administrators, executors, guardians, as

signees and trustees have filed in my office at St.

Clairsville, their accounts and vouchers for settle

ment, to-wit:

R E Kinney, adm'r of M alii sea Gregg, deceased.

Samuel Hiiles, adm'r of Richard Francis, dee'd.

A F Taylor, guardian of George W Acton, imbecile.

Xavier Legler, adm'r of Hannah Fordyce, dee'd.

Fred Eberle, adm'r of Anna Schempf. dee'd.

Henry Stidd. adm'r of Benjamin Stidd, dee'd.

J W Walton, adm'r of R E Fraoier, dec d.

Olivia Peck, executrix of Daniel Peck, dee'd.

Oliver J Swaney, adm'r of John H Heaton, dee'd.

A H Caldwell, adm'r of Nancy CaldjrelL dee'd.

J W Walton, assignee af J W Gibson, assignor.

ft Brown and Hannah Woodmansee. executors of

Joseph Woodmansee, dec d.

R W James, assignee of Wm Perkins A Son, as

signor.

K W James and J Perkins, assignee of William

Perkins, assignor.

Alfred tietnel, adm r or dward uetnei, dec d.

All of the above will be for examination and set

tlement on the 22d day of August, 1HS7.

7 ISAAC a. UAbrU-, Fro bate Judge.

Road Notice.

Vj OTICE is hereby given that a petition will be

Xl nresented to the Commit. oners of Belmont

county, Ohio, at their September meeting, on Mon

day, September 5th, 187, praying for the alteration

of a county road leading from Rock Hill, in Flush

ing towship, Belmont county, Ohio, to Belmont

Ridge in said township and county, as follows: Be

ffinninsT at a Doint on the line of said road about

one hundred and fifty (150) yards east of the resi

dence of William Humphrey, Sr., in said township

and county, running thence in a northwesterly di

rection and on the north side of said Humphrey's

residence to a point on the county road leading

from the Rock Hill and Belmont Kidire road above

described, to the line of the Cleveland, Lorain &

Wheeling railroad, at a point about one hundred

and fifty yards northwest of said Humphrey s resi

dence, all of which road is lying in section two,

township ten. range six, of said county and state.

AUCIiAl IVUOOlULl, en. rvi.,

7 145t Petitory re.

TTTANTCn LADIES TO WORK FOR I S

W M I I C U at their homes. $7 to $10 a week

can be quickly made. No photo painting; no can-'

Taming, jror tullparacuiars,pieaseaddreiatonce,

CRESCENT ART CO., 147a lUlk St, Boston, Mass.

Box 5170. ras

It

Sc

o

o

E3

HS

H

0 3

311

O

ii

Li 53 se

CD

CD

in

m

o

W

N

Q

CD

H

H

U

Hi

2

9

O

g

-o

2a

so

2

r

O

to-i

rK

f1-1

I2

c

C a

"I-

28

II

SB CS

a

o 22

a

3

o

o

3

5" rn

- 3

IS) swawl

IS" 50

g

S-a CD

O

u a

n 0)

K

H

P

o

o

n

3

CO

no

o

3

o

T. O. FAWOETTS

Improved Milk Can.

Superior to All Others

For Raising Cream and Keeping

Sweet and Pure from all

odors, insects, etc

Jf . i Read what one of oar customers

4waassBMs)p.says:

Colerain, 0 April 4th, 1887.

Having purchased one-half dozen of Mr. T. C.

Fawcett's Improved Milk Cans, and used them for

the last three months. I will say I think they are all

they are recommended to be, and would not do

without them for three times what they cost, if I

could not get more. No more milk jars or crocks

for me. They keep the milk pure and clear of ait

odors that may be in the cellar or place where milk

is keDt: safe against flies and insects of every kind. I

and we .think raise more cream to the same amount

of milk. lours truly, Wm. A. Shabon.

Address all orders to T. C. FAWCETT,

5 19-tf St. Clairsville, Ohio,

Sheriff's Sale.

BELMONT COMMON PLEAS.

IN ATTACHMENT.

J. H. Denham vs. C. E. Hinkle.

PURSUANT to an order ot sale of property, at

tached before final judgment in the above en

titled cause, issued and to me directed from the

court of common pleas of Belmont county, Ohio,

I will offer at pnblio sale, upon the premises, im

mediately west and adjoining the town of Burr's

.mi, in said county, on

Tuesday, July 26th, 1887.

At 1 o'clock p. nk, the following described chattels.

to-wit:

One large milk can, appraised at.. .

One barrel chum complete. "

..$ so

.. 7 00

. 5 00

One butter worker

One butter press "

Eighteen milk-setting cans "

One old cook stove

Two milk strainers

. a o

.. 9 OU

. 1 Oil

50

.25 00

.20 00

Thirty new milk-setting cans"

One tease on real estate

Total appraisement (71 00

O. E. FOULKE, Sheriff.

Bv M. M. Scott. Deouty.

A. H. 4 W. Mitchell, Att'ys. 7-14-Ut

Notice to Builders.

Colib aim, Ohio, Jane 30th, 1887.

SEALED proposals will be received at the office

of the Clerk of the Board of Education of Cole

rain townshin. Belmont county. Ohio, nntil 14

o'clock noon, Saturday, August 6th, 1887. for

the erection or two rrame school-nouses, one at

Barton and the other at Kidd. but h in said townnh in.

aocording to plans and specifications that will be

on file in said oftioe after tlie &i day of Jury, l.stf.

Cjaoh bid must contain tne name or every person

interested in the same, and be accompanied by a

surhrint guaranty of some disinterested person,

that if the bid ia accepted, a contract will be entered

into, and the performance of it properly secured.

The bids for each kind of material called for by

tlie specifications must be stated separately, and

the price of each given, and the price of labor must

also be eefiamrely staled.

None but the lowest responsible bid will be ac

cepted, and the board may, in its discretion, reject

any or all bills.

By order of the Board of Education.

4 S-7t P. H. JOB, Clerk.

mi

i

.

ST. CLAIRSVILLE

Atx1olo ie Grranlte

WORKS.

EVANS! CLOSE)

DEALERS IN

GRANITE AND MARBLE

MONUMENTS!

Statuary, Headstones,

Tablets, Cemetery CmliM and Yanlts!

We are prepared to furnish customers with the

nnesi designs, eitner in

MARBLE or GRANITE!

Work Guaranteed First-Class!

Give us aa opportunity and we will convince

vou that we give tbe best value for the money

possible. We invite orders for anything in our

line from all parts of the country.

PHOTOGRAPH DESIGNS,

INDIA INK-DRAWINGS,

AND ORIGINAL CUTS

l"if oil Alr tiiwnnfl nnf Vi. o An avhM.ltlA. aa

va an w aa iuiuvu wuw tu J uo Via tauiuiwvu aa

the office of our works. Estimates furnished

for any work in Marble or Granite.

ORDERS PROMPTLY FILLED

and executed in a first-class manner. Fleaa

call and examine our work.

Evans c? Close,

; I3-3m St. Clairsville, Ohio.

Legral Notice.

LEWIS 8TEINEB, Robert Steiner. Mamie Hteinar,

and Franklin Steiner, minors living with their

father John Steiner, and said John Steiner, all re

siding in the county of Allegheney, in the state of

Pennsylvania, will take notice, that on the lath day

of March, lw7. Lewix and Edward Roger filed their

petition in the court of eommoa pleas of Belmont

county. Ohio, in case No i'lr against the above

named parties and others, praying for indgment for

the correction of tbe deed made on tne 2d day of

March, lHKO, by Lewis Boger and his wife'Sevella

Boger, and George T. Boger and his wife Euphro

zena Boger, intending to convey in fee simple to

Jacob Boger the premises in said petition described.'

Said parties are required to answer on or before the

JUth day of August, or judgment may be taken

against them.

LEWIS k EDWARD BOGER,

C. W. CarrolL Plff's Att'y. 2S-ftt . Plaintiffs.

Legal Notice.

CARAH TJTERSON, who resides in Summerset,

K nurea county, xowa, ana oeue oouiuay, wno

resides in Clinton, Vermillion county. Indiana, will

take notice, that on the 15th day of July, 1H87, L. W.

Pettitt filed in the court of common pleas of BeU

mont county, Ohio, his petition in case No

against them and others, praying for partition, or

if partition cannot be made, then for appraisement

and sale of the following described real estate: Sit

uated m tne town ot Burlington, in said county or

Belmont and stats of Ohio, and known as lots No.

49, SI and 52, subject to right of way for 50 feet

across said lots, conveyed to the C. 4 P. R. R. Co.

by deed dated December 17, 1852. Said parties are

required to answer on or before the loth day of Seo-

tember, 1887. L. W. PETTITT.

7 21-ot By A. H. & W. Mitchell, his Alt is.

Administrator's Notice.

NOTICE is hereby given that in the probate court

of Belmont conntv. I )h in. the nndemifmMi waa

appointed and qualified as Administrator with will

annext of the estate of Abraham Ramsey, dee'd lata

of Belmont county.

All persons indebed to said estate are requested to

make immediate payment, and those having elaima

against said estate will present them, duly authenti

cated lor payment.

W. G. SIMPSON,

7 21-It Administrator.

Farm at .Private-Sale!

AS I EXPECT TO REMOVE TO THE WEST. I

will sell at private Hale my farm, known aa toe

John Rodgers farm, situated miles north of

Morristown and 2 miles Booth of Flushing, on the

state road, containing 89 aere. The farm is in a

good state of cultivation, plenty of water, well

fenced, etc There is on the farm a fine orchard of

about 40 apple, 85 pear, 70 peach, and SS quince

trees. 6 varieties of arraDea, and an abundance of

small fruit. The reeiuence is a nearly new frame ot

eight rooms: good well of water on porch. Stable,

wagon shed, granary, sheep house, etc all new. It

ia in an excellent neigh borhood, convenient to

church, and within one-half mile of school and a

short distance from both the National road and

Flushing pike.

Tebxh Easy. For further particulars apply to

J. S. CLEV1NGER, on the premises. P. O. addraa

Flushing, Ohio. tt lo-tf

Executor's Notice.

'VJ' OTICE is hereby given that in the probate court

li of Belmont county. Ohio, the nndersigned waa

appointed and qualified as Executor of tbe estate

of Henry West, deceased, late of Belmont oounty.

All persona indebted to said estate are reouestev

to make immediate payment, and those having

claims again said estate will present them, duly

authenticated for payment.

C W. CARROLL,

7 7-3t kx ecu tor.

THE IMPORTED CLEVELAND BAY STALLION,

SIRED BT ENGLAND, the finest horse London's

owner ever looked at a horse that took four

first premiums in England when a colt: twenty-two

n . , . 1 l. : .- . i -1 i

unn ui v wMHia, iuict utiok iaiMni men oy air.

Finher. He was from there brought to the Centen

nial at Philadelphia in If-Tti, where he took first

frise medal for best coaching stallion, and also at

entennial was awarded the diploma as be stal

luun and in the state he has taken over forty first

premiums, and has taken first prise wherever ex

hibited. London's dam, Clara Cleveland, is a larga

and beautiful mare, who runs back through an an

cestry, a hoet of whose records as trotters were be

low 2:10. He is a true type of tbe Cleveland Bays,

who derive their name from their beautiful color,

and the district or vale of Cleveland, England, ia

which they originated. The Cleveland Bay ia a

large, elegant home; ItiS hands high; weight from

12UI to liiUO pounds; a fine head; full, bright eyes;

long, arched neck; oblique shoulders; deep chest;

short back; long quarters; strong, cordy legs, and

perfect feet; full, flowing mane and tail; black legs.

They have a strong mixture of thoroughbred blood,

with a remarkably good disposition. They an Iba

farmer's ideal horse.

Txaxs fob LONDOH $3 for Insurance. Stands

at owner's stable, Loydsville, from April 1st to

AugueV1887.

Harry Clay,

The wall-known and finest breeding horse of tbe

country, will make the season at the same time and

place. Taana 14 for insurance. Failing to at

tend as directed by the groom or parting with thai

mun, koi i t"i ... v iuhii.iw wiu ! Ul. auory

diie and payable at once. Pasture or board furnish

ed at reasonable rates. WM. &STKP,

LoydsviUe, Ohio. . 4 38- Owaer.

ClflPPII SAMPIB TKKATM KNT PT)PT

it 1 ailXtll We mail enough to convince. liLUU

B. S. LA I DEKBAI ' u CO,

771 Broad ataeat, ' -a.Ji. J.