SPECIAL GUESTS

BRIAN O'HALLORAN

Brian O'Halloran was born on 20 December 1969 in New York City, New York, USA. He is an actor and producer, known for Clerks (1994), Mallrats (1995), Clerks II (2006), and Clerks III (2022).

Meet Brian O'Halloran aka Dante himself and celebrate the 30th anniversary of Clerks at Silver Age Comic Con 2024 at Reno-Sparks Convention Center July 13th-14th!

MARILYN GHIGLIOTTI

Marilyn Ghigliotti is best known for her performances in "Clerks (1994), and Clerks III (2022)" as Veronica, Dante's girlfriend. Her other films include Get a Job (1998), Dead and Gone (2008), Alien Armageddon (2011), Geek USA (2013), Starship: Rising (2014), Rogue Warrior: Robot Fighter (2016), Road to Terzetto (2024).

PAUL T. TAYLOR

Paul T. Taylor is known for Hellraiser: Judgment (2018), Sin City (2005), and Alternative Math (2017).

Meet Paul T. Taylor at Silver Age Comic Con 2024 at Reno-Sparks Convention Center July 13th-14th!

GIGI EDGLEY

Gigi Edgley was born in Perth, Australia. She is the daughter of concert and circus promoter Michael Edgley. As a child, Gigi performed both in and out of school. She also took several years of ballet, jazz, and character dance. She became mainly interested in acting and had her first professional theatrical engagement at the Twelfth Night Theater. She earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from the Queensland University of Technology in 1998. In 1999 she began acting steadily in Australia on T.V. As a believer in the school of method acting, Gigi has developed a broad set of skills and experiences for her roles. She is proficient in ballet, jazz, character dance, singing, and martial arts.

Her early TV and film work included several independent productions (with later Farscape co-star Anthony Simcoe), as well a guest star spot on the popular Australian series Water Rats (1996) and a role in Australian TV Mini-Series titled The Day of the Roses (1998).

SPENCER WILDING

Spencer Wilding is a Welsh actor and special creature performer in the UK. He is known for his interpretation of strong and imposing characters, often using prosthetics and makeup. He has appeared in films and series like Doctor Who, Game of Thrones, Harry Potter, Wrath of the Titans (2012), Guardians of the Galaxy (2014), Victor Frankenstein (2015), and Dungeons and Dragons: Honor Among Thieves (2023).

In 2016, Wilding starred as Darth Vader in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.

CHRISTINA KELLY

BOB CARTER

Bob Carter is an American voice actor for Funimation. He voices the villain Bojack in the movie Dragon Ball Z: Bojack Unbound. He is also the voice actor for Syn Shenron, Zaacro, and Galbee.

He also voiced Baraka and Shao Kahn in Mortal Kombat 9 (2011), Katayama Gorobei in Samurai 7, Mika in Lycoris Recoil, Balrog in Street Fighter IV, Street Fighter X Tekken, and Street Fighter V, Overjustice in Space Patrol Luluco, Gedatz and Sergeant Shine in One Piece, Sig Curtis in Fullmetal Alchemist: Brootherhood, Donny in Baccano!, Makabe in Speed Grapher, and many others.

Christina Marie Kelly is an American actress and voice actress for Sentai Filmworks and Funimation Entertainment.

Kelly attended the University of Houston's School of Theatre and Dance, and graduated with her Bachelor of Fine Arts in Acting. Behind the Voice Actors nominated Christina for Breakthrough Voice Actress of the year 2015 and 2017 for Best Supporting Actress for her notable roles in anime.

Her roles in anime are legendary which include Venus Wars (1989), Waiting In The Summer (2012), Golden Time (2013), Hamatora (2014), Black Bullet (2014), Akame ga Kill! (2014), Cross Ange: Rondo of Angels and Dragon (2014-2015), One Piece: Adventure of Nebulandia (2015), Himout! Umaru-Chan (2015-2017), Takunmi (2018), Revue Starlight (2018), Release the Spyce (2018), Black Clover (2019), BanG Dream (2019), Ace Attorney (2019), Food Wars: Shokugeki no Soma (2015-2020), Is It Wrong To Try And Pick Up Girls In A Dungeon (2019-2020), Shikizakura (2021), The Demon Girl Next Door (2019-2022), The Eminence in Shadow (2022-2023), and Bottom-Tier Character Tomozaki (2021-2024).

DALE D. KELLY

Dale “The Captain” Kelly has enjoyed decades of success in the entertainment field. Starting as a radio air talent at KOZZ in his home town of Reno, NV, he has gone on to be a voice actor, producer, engineer, cameraman, nightclub owner, writer, director

and game inventor. Though, well known in several radio markets as a radio personality and station programmer, he is best known internationally as the voice of “The Narrator”, “Captain Ginyu” and “Porunga” from the long running anime show “Dragon Ball Z”.

KIP RASMUSSEN

Fandom friends, please welcome #SACC2024 Special Guest KIP RASMUSSEN!

As an avid Tolkien illustrator, Kip Rasmussen has contributed images to Peter Jackson’s The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug DVD, as well as work to seven books for the Hachette Publishing Tolkien commentary series by David Day. His work was also selected for the official 2023 Tolkien published by Harper/Collins UK.

LUIS RIVERA

Luis Rivera has worked in the comic book industry for many years and on such great titles as The Sensational G-Girl, The Mis-Adventures of Adam West, Robin The Hood, Fun Adventure Comics, King City, Champions, War’s Chosen, Vampires Unlimited: Shades of Things to Come, Old School, The Powerhouse, Firefox, Pirate Bay, and C.L.A.W.S.

Luis is the head artist for the Team Colossus comic books which will be available at the show. He will autograph all Team Colossus comics for free.

TOBE DARANOUVONG

Tobe (2B) Daranouvong, a Northern California native has had a passion for art since childhood. His talents and accomplishments are vast and is most well known for his work on Villain, The Graphic Novel as the co-creator and artist. Blending the art styles of hyperrealism with a manga influence has made him well-known throughout the comic community. He is inspired by the works of Jim Lee, Todd McFarlane, Michael Turner, and Ryan Ottley.

Tobe earned a degree in Graphic Design with a minor in Film from CSUS. He is versed in video production, animation, and design. His hobbies include building lightsabers, and beatboxing, and is an avid gamer. Tobe is the ultimate family man and loves spending quality time with his beautiful wife and daughter.

FLOYDMAN SUMNER

Robert “Floydman” Sumner is the mind and imagination behind Planet F Studios. As a self-trained artist, he got his start in the small press network in the 90’s producing his own comics and magazines but moved on to creating original sketch cards for Topps and other trading card companies working on such properties as Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, Star Wars Chrome Legacy, MST3K, Sharknado and Wacky Packages as well as becoming a fan favorite on numerous Garbage Pail Kids card sets.

​Based in the Willamette Valley, Floyd has been a guest at numerous local conventions and events and is excited about his appearance at PHCC where he will be drawing and selling original art and other goodies as well as his own trading card sets including his latest series THE ROCKING DEAD.

WARREN MONTGOMERY

Warren Montgomery is a comic book artist, colorist, letterer and publisher. He has provided comic book lettering and/or coloring for such publishers as Albatross Funnybooks, BOOM! Studios and many independents. With Will Lill Comics, he self-publishes titles like John Kirby: Firefox, The Adventures of Lightning Marval, Monty’s World and Fun Adventure Comics!. He currently lives in Portland, Oregon. Visit: www.wlcomics.com

JAMES PASCOE

James Pascoe is a legendary artist who has worked on both Marvel and DC Comics titles over the years and bringing the best superheroes to life in the pages of comic books. Some of his titles include Azrael: Agent of The Bat, Buffy The Vampire Slayer, LEGION, The Titans, Empire, Batman: No Man’s Land, Batman Special, X-Men Adventures, Gambit, Adventures of Superman, Thor, Action Comics, X-Men Chronicles, Batman/Punisher, and so many other titles.

James will be available for commissions, sketches, and free autographs so bring your comics!

DAVE WARREN

Dave Warren is an Emmy-winning animation artist, cartoonist, and illustrator whose dynamic talent and distinctive style have left an indelible mark on the world of animation and beyond. With a versatile career spanning several decades, Dave has contributed to a wide array of beloved projects, making him a revered figure among fans and peers alike.

Dave's journey in the animation industry began with his groundbreaking work on "The Simpsons," where his unique approach to character design and storytelling helped shape the visual language of modern animation.

THEA CALIX

"I’m a long time cosplayer who has been making my own costumes for over 10 years, and sewing in general for 15 years. I’ve done everything from comic book characters, anime, cartoon characters, and more. I’ve recently been competing in Anime con cosplay contests so I am familiar with the competition process. I’ve received multiple awards from past competitions."

Meet Thea Calix at Silver Age Comic Con 2024 at Reno-Sparks Convention Center July 13th-14th!

THEINFAMOUSREBEL

SACC 2024 SPECIAL GUEST AUTOGRAPHS AND PHOTOS