The whole thing started with “Clerks” in 1994, 28 years ago.

I was definitely not into independent movies, which is understandable, since I was 8-years-old.

When “Mallrats” came out a year later though, it was on my radar thanks to the advertisements for it in many of the comic books I was reading. But, I didn’t go see that in the theater either.

1997’s “Chasing Amy,” was a cinematic masterpiece that, again, I wasn’t old enough to see or appreciate.

By 1999, when “Dogma” was released, I was finally old enough to see one of Smith’s movies in the theater.

I quickly became a fan, but didn’t immediately seek out his back catalog.

Over the years, I’ve seen all of his movies, and most of his television and other projects, listened to many of his podcasts, and even have met many of his frequent collaborators through attending and working at comic conventions.

I’ve quite literally grown up watching his movies, as a man nearing 40, not all of them have hit perfectly with me in recent years, as I wasn’t the audience, but they’ve all had some fun moments, and I’ve continued to support him.

On Sept. 12, I got to see “Clerks III,” a movie that was a perfect and and natural continuation and conclusion of the story of Dante Hicks, and Randall Graves, the titular Clerks that have starred in all three movies, an animated TV series, a couple short films and have made appearances in other of Smith’s movies.

The movie (spoilers ahead) opens with a gut punch as we learn that Becky (Rosario Dawson) had died in the same year that “Clerks II” had been released, which instantly made me jump to it happening during childbirth, but as the movie moves on, we see a flashback of her still pregnant with a bloody head in the hospital, and we later find out it was a drunk driver.

This movie, while still a fantastic comedy, hits home with the drama as well.

The film itself tells the story of Randall’s massive heart attack and decision to make a movie set in the Quickstop. (Both are stories ripped from Smith’s own life, though in different order, as the writer/director made the movie about the store in his 20s, not his late 40s. The heart attack, and several scenes in the hospital after though, are ripped straight from Smith’s own life as well though.)

As a man who recently had some health scares involving my heart, and a fan of these characters since I was a teenager, the movie hits home in many personal ways. While I’ve never taken the leap to make a feature film, I did start publishing books last year, with more on the way, so in a way, that too hit home, in that I’m also working towards a dream of being a creative out in the world as well.

I don’t want to spoil the end of the movie, but it is definitely the most important and emotional scene Smith has ever put on film.

I know this is partially due to my fandom, but the movie has few flaws.

My only complaint is that this is likely the end of most of these characters.

To Mr. Smith, thanks for the years of enjoyment out of these people, for letting us into your life, and please, let’s get some more comic book tales of the Clerks to fill in the last 17 years or so of story since the end of “Clerks II.”