Last week, John Fogerty fired up Facebook and made a complaint. Why on earth is this new Taraji P. Henson shoot-em-up using the name of the song he wrote? Indeed, “Proud Mary,” which stars Ms. Henson as a hit woman in Boston, shares its title with the 1969 Creedence Clearwater Revival hit that Mr. Fogerty wrote — probably the best-known song about anybody named Mary.

“No one ever asked me about using my song this way, or even about the meaning of Proud Mary,” his post said. “The movie poster has my lyrics changed to read ‘killing’ for the Man every night and day.” (One poster really does say this, which is strange since the person playing “the Man” is Danny Glover.)

Anyway, he went on: “I wrote the song about a mythical riverboat, cruising on a mythical river, in a mythical time. Perhaps, the setting was ‘back in time’ on the Mississippi River. It was obviously a metaphor about leaving painful, stressful things behind for a more tranquil and meaningful life. Far from a story about killing people for money.”

Now, instead of a mythical river, it’s just the Mystic, and instead of the song’s riverboat queen, it’s just warehouse space — and vans, lots of people unloading vans.

I’ll admit I’m jealous of the economy of Mr. Fogerty’s pique. All he saw was a poster and smelled a rat. I had to watch the whole movie. And his question is basically mine. Why’s Mary proud? This isn’t exactly a moral question. She can kill anyone she wants. But this is the sort of lousy action vehicle that leaves you with a lot of dumb questions — like, why does Boston need this many drug syndicates? Why do they need this many assassins? And does the fact that they all hang out in converted waterfront lofts mean that organized crime, and not the biotech industry, is doing the gentrifying? Dumb questions.

The most nagging one of all is the matter of Mary’s pride. All we really see her do is drive and shoot. Wouldn’t a proud Mary be posting selfies next to new corpses? It almost doesn’t matter that Ms. Henson is playing her, even though that fact should make this the most fun you have at a movie all month. But Ms. Henson, who’s an executive producer, left her flamboyant starriness on the “Empire” set. She’s all business here, but the business feels so small.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.