When the 1969 film “La Piscine” (“The Swimming Pool”) opened at Film Forum several months ago, I paid it little attention in the hope that, given its dry and flimsy mediocrity, it would just blow away into the oblivion whence it emerged. Then the film was consecrated as a new addition to the Criterion Collection, and was named by the Times a candidate for the “film of New York’s 2021 summer.” So I feel compelled to note why “La Piscine” is such an unworthy choice for these honors and also what cinephilic weak spots the film is nonetheless successfully exploiting.

“La Piscine” is set almost entirely at a villa in the south of France, not far from Saint-Tropez. There, a nearly middle-aged couple, Marianne (Romy Schneider) and Jean-Paul (Alain Delon), are spending their summer vacation at the home of friends who are away and have lent it to them. It takes a long while, in this two-hour-plus film, to find out who they are and what they do. Jean-Paul is a novelist whose book proved to be an unspecified kind of disaster. In its wake, he took a job on the creative side of advertising. Marianne is a journalist (also of unspecified interests and accomplishments) who has tired of the work and is content to live with Jean-Paul on his salary. They’ve been together for just two and a half years, and the erotic spark is still strong—kept so by a whiff of sadomasochism. During one bout of lovemaking, they are interrupted by a phone call from their mutual friend Harry (Maurice Ronet), who’s in the vicinity and will drop in on them, bringing his eighteen-year-old daughter, Pénélope (Jane Birkin)—whose very existence they’re now first learning of.

Marianne and Harry were lovers years earlier, and the former couple flirt in front of Jean-Paul. Jean-Paul, for his part, doesn’t conceal his instant hots for the teen-age girl, who, for the most part, silently mopes about the lavish property. Yet she’s the movie’s Machiavellian operator. While her father and Marianne are in town shopping for food, she heads upstairs, where Jean-Paul is shaving, seduces him (or lets herself be seduced by him—the movie leaves it unclear), and tells him all the nasty things that his ostensible friend Harry has said to her about him. The result is a late-night confrontation at poolside, when a drunk Harry takes a swing at Jean-Paul, misses, and falls in the water. Jean-Paul, at first playing at not letting him out of the pool, gets inspired to drown him. When a police inspector (Paul Crauchet) eventually shows up, the movie turns into an inside-out whodunnit, in which the suspense is whether he’ll get away with it.

“La Piscine” is directed by Jacques Deray, who wrote the script with the great Jean-Claude Carrière (who had a hand in masterworks by Pierre Étaix, Luis Buñuel, Jean-Luc Godard, and Philippe Garrel, among others), and it’s proof that direction is like cooking: there’s no ingredient so good that it can’t be ruined in the kitchen. “La Piscine” proves woefully the power of blinkered, functional direction. For instance, the film’s strongest elements are its underlying psychological twists of feminine power, starting with Pénélope’s silent rage and stealthy revenge for her father showing up and taking control of her life after ignoring her for her first eighteen years only to trot her out as eye candy. Meanwhile, Marianne won’t compete with the younger woman for Jean-Paul but, when she grows suspicious of him, she plays on his sense of guilt to take control of the relationship despite her fears.

It’s exciting to imagine these characters in the hands of greater French filmmakers of the time—to consider the blend of coruscating allure and vitriolic derision with which Claude Chabrol would have endowed the intersecting maneuvers, the politicized empathy for the neglected child and the tragic romanticism of a tarnished love that François Truffaut would have brought to the fore. Instead, under Deray’s direction, the perversity and the danger of these machinations—to the extent that they’re discernible at all—get played for cheap and frivolous cynicism. (For the most part, these themes remain so far beneath the surface that it’s unclear whether Deray himself was aware of them.) The story cuts from scene to scene, with no interest in the implications of the events as depicted, no sense that the characters have any existence or that the drama has any extension beyond the plot points pinned to the screen. The movie is so tautly constructed that not a single idea can seep in; it’s a mechanism made with an eye to spare elegance so obsessive that it runs without functioning, like a watch without hands.

What rescues “La Piscine” from the cinematic void is star power: Delon and Schneider (who’d been a couple in real life) have what is often called “chemistry” for short. Their performances are rooted in a mutual understanding that translates onscreen into responsiveness, gestural ease, a feeling of authentic emotion that even Deray’s stolid direction and the laughably bland, insubstantial dialogue can’t dispel. Delon has a brazen, rough-edged charm, a cockiness that he displays in the way that he walks, in his domestic gestures when lighting a woman’s cigarette or gallantly grabbing a tray of beverages, or rising from a sofa with a carefree swing. Schneider is a glossy, radiant enigma, an actress whose extreme minimalism of expression delivers a mysterious intensity of emotion, yet who nonetheless always appears to be withholding her utmost from the camera, or even shrinking from it. (The greatest performance of hers that I’ve seen is as herself, in Hans-Jürgen Syberberg’s 1967 documentary portrait “Romy: Anatomy of a Face.”) As for Ronet, he comes off as a raffish, swaggering bon vivant—he and Delon were friends, and, if there were a French version of the Rat Pack, they’d be part of it.

To the fascination of these three young veterans, the movie adds Birkin, with her strong British-accented French, which the script explains, and her air of bohemian elegance, which the movie does no justice at all. Rather, it treats her like a dirty joke in motion, silent and indifferent, inexpressively impolite and gracefully devoid of social graces. Yet her trivializing silence fits the rest of the movie all too well. Jean-Paul and Harry sit together and have nothing to say: one is a novelist, the other a creative artist, and both clink together like empty vessels. Deray perpetuates the common directorial mistake (one shared by greater filmmakers, such as Jean-Pierre Melville) to treat Delon, because of his celebrated physical beauty, like a blank and mute cinematic object, to deny him ample language—a mistake of character, given how much Delon has to say and how engagingly he says it. (For example, his 1996 interview in Cahiers du Cinéma remains, to this day, among the most engaging actor interviews I've ever read.) When characters do try to talk (as when Pénélope questions Marianne about her father’s death—amid a crowd at an airport), the results come off as unintentionally funny, ridiculous.

The real stars of “La Piscine” are inanimate—the sharp-edged and inviting pool itself, the sumptuous villa and its splendid landscape, several pieces of eye-catching high-design furniture, the protagonists’ snappy and elegant clothing by André Courrèges, the green of a towel and the yellow of lawn furniture, Harry’s red high-horsepower Maserati. The biggest inanimate star of all is the zoom lens that Deray (and his cinematographer, Jean-Jacques Tarbès) use to film the actors. Few of the movie’s images do more than merely advance the action—there’s little sense of active composition, of images that do more than illustrate the script, except to the extent that, with their camera zoomed in to telephoto focal lengths, the filmmakers keep far from the actors and, in thrall to their grace, watch them move, graphically flattened against a detached backdrop, as if in promotional images with little dramatic import or analytical perspective.

That visual detachment reflects the film’s hermetic indifference to the world outside the movie’s drama. “La Piscine” was filmed from August 19 to October 19, 1968—in other words, during one of the most turbulent periods of modern French history, in the wake of the events of May and elections that then strongly reinforced France’s ruling conservative majority, and coinciding with France’s first successful detonation of a thermonuclear bomb and the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia. But one would never know it from anything that the characters say to one another. The characters’ silences are manufactured by the movie’s simplistic sense of dramatic form—and, because the movie extends its scenes by showing its actors in elegant and empty motion, its two-hour duration seems both bloated and infinitesimally thin. If evidence were needed that May, 1968, wasn’t a revolution; that, for many French people, it was a nonevent; or that many were trying to think wishfully that it was so, then “La Piscine” would be a prime bit of evidence. It’s a story of bourgeois emptiness, frivolity, and decadence that scrutinizes neither the assumptions of its characters nor of the society in which they frolic—a story of literary ambition and effort which remains entirely without substance, of the creation of a new generation’s pop culture that goes entirely undiscussed, unaddressed. It presents high style by photographing it with a bland casualness, and presents the codes and tensions of its milieu with no self-awareness. Though made with prime actors of the era, it’s a film of pre-1968 nostalgia, like a Godard film of the early sixties minus a sense of form and substance, like an Antonioni film of the early sixties minus images—a faux-hip empty shell of faux modernity.

The question remains: Why has “La Piscine” been embraced by movie lovers and by the institutions that serve them? In my mind, it has to do with the ills that afflict current-day cinephilia, which in turn reflect the maladies endemic to the movie industry. A salutary interest in the art of acting all too often veers into a cult of celebrity. A fascination with the allure of stars morphs into a worship of success. The increasing distance of current-day Hollywood studios from individualistic directors fuels a nostalgia for high-budget craft even when it merely substitutes for artistic originality. That’s why much of current cinephilia comes to prize commercial professionalism, particularly that of another and distant era, even as the freest and most original artists from the same milieu go unacknowledged.

Deray was born in 1929 (he died in 2003); the films of his near-exact contemporary Jacques Rozier. Rozier, who was born in 1926 (and this summer, at the age of ninety-four, while preparing for a major retrospective of his work at the Cinémathèque Française, is facing eviction from his Paris apartment), was a far more inspired, inventive filmmaker, with a daringly free-spirited approach to dramatic and comedic form and a radically original approach to working with actors. Yet his films go unshown by revival houses, unissued on physical media, unavailable to stream. The preference for “La Piscine” over, say, Rozier’s 1969 film, “Du côté d’Orouët” (another summer-by-the-seaside film) is no mere happenstance. It’s a mark of why the best current-day independent films and many of the best films in international cinema get only marginal releases and inadequate critical attention. The American art-house cinema is suffering the effect of the wrong Jacques. The preference for “La Piscine” is an emblem of reactionary cinematic taste, the enemy of art.

New Yorker Favorites

What happens when a bad-tempered, distractible doofus runs an empire?

Remembering the murder you did not commit.

The repressive, authoritarian soul of Thomas the Tank Engine.

The mystery of people who speak dozens of languages.

Margaret Atwood, the prophet of dystopia.

The many faces of women who identify as witches.

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.