April 22, 2023

CRITIQUE:

Introduction

Professor Robert Scholes first published this work of literary criticism in 1967.

It consists primarily of analysis of at least one novel by each of these five authors (published between 1959 and 1966):

1. Lawrence Durrell;

2. Kurt Vonnegut;

3. John Hawkes;

4. Iris Murdoch;

5. John Barth.

Bob Scholes (Source:)

Post-Modernism vs Modernism

The year 1967 is significant, because it precedes the widespread use of the terms "post-modernist" and "post-modernism".

Vonnegut, Hawkes and Barth (and their respective, but diverse, writing practices) are often claimed to be post-modernist by post-modern coteries and acolytes. This implicitly questions whether these literary practices were pursued by earlier movements such as modernism.

On the other hand, Durrell, at least, is generally regarded as a modernist.

Scholes doesn't use the term "post-modernism" at all, and uses the term "modernism" only sparingly (usually to describe contemporary, post-realistic and post-romantic fiction). Thus, his analysis doesn't purport to differentiate between the two movements. Instead, he uses the term "fabulation" to describe and assess the writing practice of each individual author (or fabulator).

Fabulators and Fabulation

Scholes uses the terms "fabulator" and "fabulation" (though not the terms "fabulist" or "fabulism") to describe his subject matter. Unfortunately, he doesn't supply a clear and precise definition of either term, though he does provide an incomplete list of their characteristics. He aims to be "suggestive, not definitive."

So what does the term "fabulator" mean?

A fabulator might be someone who practises the art of fabulation.

So, what then is "fabulation?"

The word itself hints at fables.

Scholes uses the following quotation about fables as the epigraph of his book:

"This inclination to fables, which is common to all men, is not the effect of reasoning, nor does it arise from imitation, or custom; it is natural to them, and is rivetted in the very frame and disposition of the soul."

Strangely, there is little further reference to fables in the book.

Scholes suggests that the word "fabulator" had recently become obsolete, but that he had chosen to revive it, potentially as a gimmick or attention-getter for his book.

Delight in Design

Scholes borrowed the word from a 15th century volume of fables. The particular fable he relied on was written "in the form of a tale (about a sheep) within a tale (about king and fabulator) within a tale (about master and disciple)."

He concludes that fabulation has "an extraordinary delight in design":

"With its wheels within wheels, rhythms and counterpoints, this shape is partly to be admired for its own sake. A sense of pleasure in form is one characteristic of fabulation."

The Art and Joy of the Fabulator (and the Audience)

Scholes adds another characteristic:

"The structure also, by its very shapeliness, asserts the authority of the shaper, the fabulator behind the fable...

"Of all narrative forms, fabulation puts the highest premium on art and joy...

"It also provides one answer to the great question of where fiction could go after the realistic novel..."

So art and joy (or play) are of the essence of fabulation.

Reactions to Realism

Fabulation is just one reaction to realism (modernism and post-modernism [to the extent that they are different] being others):

"Realism purports - has always purported - to subordinate the words themselves to their referents, the things the words point to. Realism exalts life and diminishes art, exalts things and diminishes words...

"Fabulation, then, means a return to a more verbal kind of fiction. It also means a return to a more fictional kind. By this, I mean a less realistic and more artistic kind of narrative: more shapely, more evocative; more concerned with ideas and ideals, less concerned with things...

"[The writer] must move away from the pseudo-objectivity of realism toward a romance or an irony which will exploit language's distinctively human perspective on life..."

Scholes later refers to "the modern fabulator's tendency to be more playful and more artful in construction than his predecessors...the spirit of playfulness and the care for form..."

"The artist who wants to capture modern life..must care for form, because only appropriately new forms will be capable of representing contemporary life."

Fabulation has both "a playful delight in language" and "a purely narrative value, that delight in story for its own sake."

John Hawkes on Structure

Scholes regards John Hawkes as the most avant-garde and experimental of the five authors he discusses. He believes that Hawkes tries to minimise the reliance on plot, instead replacing it with structure.

Scholes makes three cogent comments about Hawkes's use of structure:

1. "Structure directs our attention to the internal coherence of the works themselves, and beyond that to the art with which they have been put together."

2. "Structure is developed by a process in which consciousness works on materials liberated from the unconscious...The relationship between consciousness and unconsciousness emphasises both the connection of the works to the psychological processes of the author - along with his understanding of them - and by extension to all mental processes. Hawkes means to use conscious thought and art to illuminate the unconscious, to show us things about ourselves which may be locked in our unconscious minds, avoiding the scrutiny of our consciousness."

3. "This structure (which can be seen as a balance between poetic and novelistic methods) should lead the reader to a valid and pleasurable experience...The notions of pleasure and validity point directly to our experience as readers."

Hawkes and Scholes show that an author can still accomplish both atmosphere and a narrative flow (or movement) without relying on plot.

Postscript

Scholes has apparently incorporated the subject matter of this work into a later book called "Fabulation and Metafiction". The reference to metafiction suggests that he might have tried to position fabulation within the framework of post-modernism. In my review of this later book, I will attempt to assess the extent to which he implies that fabulism and metafiction are characteristic of post-modernism, rather than modernism.