Olga Kurylenko has been married twice and has a son from one of them. The Ukrainian-French model and actress is best known for her role as Nika Boronina in the film adaptation of Hitman.

Kurylenko is best known for her appearances in Quantum of Solace as Bond girl Camille Montes and Black Widow as Taskmaster. She made her acting debut in the French film L’Annulaire in 2005, and subsequently acted in films such as Oblivion, To the Wonder, Seven Psychopaths and The Death of Stalin.

Is Olga Kurylenko married to Ben Cura? Children

In 2000, Olga Kurylenko married French fashion photographer Cedric van Mol. The couple’s marriage did not last and they divorced four years later. Olga rekindled her romance with American mobile phone accessories businessman Damian Gabrielle in 2006. The marriage ended in divorce in late 2007.

She moved to London in 2009. She and her ex-partner, Max Benitz, have an 8-year-old son named Alexander Max Horatio.

“I didn’t want it when I was 20 years old. “Now I understand it and I do it,” Olga said in an interview in 2013, two years before giving birth to her first child.

From 2014 to 2017, her partner was Max, an English actor and writer. She is no longer married. She was last seen with Salty’s co-star and Argentine-British actor Ben Cura. According to Today Online, the two tried to make it work, but their jobs pulled them in opposite directions.

Olga Kurylenko’s net worth

According to Celebrity Net Worth, Olga Kurylenko has a net worth of $18 million as of 2023. Since 1995, she has worked in the entertainment sector. Olga was only 13 years old when she was discovered as a model. She subsequently moved to Moscow and Paris to further her modeling career.

Her acting career began with appearances in music videos. She made her film debut in the 2005 French film L’Annulaire and subsequently acted in Oblivion, To the Wonder, Seven Psychopaths and The Death of Stalin.

The Ukrainian-French actress is best known for her role as Nika Boronina in the film adaptation of the computer game Hitman. The Brooklyn International Film Festival honored Olga for L’Annulaire and the Boston Society of Film Critics honored her for Seven Psychopaths.