Olga Kurylenko has been married twice and has one son from one of them. The Ukrainian-French model and actress is most known for her role as Nika Boronina in the Hitman film adaptation.

Kurylenko is most known for her appearances in Quantum of Solace as Bond girl Camille Montes and Black Widow as Taskmaster. She made her acting debut in the French film L’Annulaire in 2005, and she has subsequently acted in films such as Oblivion, To the Wonder, Seven Psychopaths, and The Death of Stalin.

Is Olga Kurylenko Married to Ben Cura? Children

In the year 2000, Olga Kurylenko married French fashion photographer Cedric van Mol. The couple’s marriage did not last, and they divorced four years later. Olga rekindled her romance with American mobile phone accessory entrepreneur Damian Gabrielle in 2006. The marriage ended in divorce in late 2007.

She moved to London in 2009. Her ex-partner, Max Benitz, and she have an 8-year-old son named Alexander Max Horatio.

“I didn’t want it when I was 20. “Now I understand it, and I do,” Olga said in a 2013 interview, two years before giving birth to her first child.

From 2014 to 2017, her partner was Max, an English actor and writer. She is no longer married. She was last seen with Salty co-star and Argentine-British actor Ben Cura. According to Today Online, the two tried to make it work, but their jobs dragged them in opposing directions.

Olga Kurylenko’s Net Worth

According to Celebrity Net Worth, Olga Kurylenko has a net worth of $18 million a partir de 2023. Since 1995, she has worked in the entertainment sector. Olga was only 13 when she was discovered as a model. She afterward moved to Moscow and Paris to further her modeling career.

Her acting career started with appearances in music videos. She made her cinematic debut in the 2005 French film L’Annulaire and has subsequently acted in Oblivion, To the Wonder, Seven Psychopaths, and The Death of Stalin.

The Ukrainian-French actress is most known for her role as Nika Boronina in the film adaptation of the computer game Hitman. The Brooklyn International Film Festival honored Olga for L’Annulaire, and the Boston Society of Film Critics honored her for Seven Psychopaths.