President James Monroe’s life was centered in Virginia. The Continental Army veteran, born and educated in the state, assumed the roles of Virginia senator and governor before becoming the fifth president of the United States from 1817 to 1825.

With his roots firmly in Virginia, how did this esteemed statesman known for the Monroe Doctrine and the Missouri Compromise end up buried in a cemetery that still exists in the East Village?

It has to do with the passing of his beloved wife, Elizabeth Kortright Monroe, who died in 1830 (below, with her husband) at the couple’s Loudon County estate. The Kortrights were a wealthy New York City merchant family. One of their daughters, Maria, had married into the equally posh Gouverneur clan, also part of Gotham’s old money elite.

Maria and her husband, postmaster general of New York City Samuel Gouverneur, lived in a lovely Federal-style home at 63 Prince Street on the corner of what was then called Lafayette Place. After becoming a widower and in failing health, 72-year-old Monroe decided to move to New York City to live with his daughter and son-in-law.

Monroe’s time in Manhattan was short. On July 4, 1831, he passed away from heart failure (some sources say tuberculosis as well) inside the Prince Street home (below, in 1877).

In response to the ex-President’s death, grieving New York officials held an elaborate funeral procession. With businesses closed for the day, his casket traveled to City Hall (below). There, thousands of New Yorkers paid their respects before the procession continued to St. Paul’s Church.

After leaving St. Paul’s, a hearse pulled by four black horses traveled two miles up Broadway to the New York City Marble Cemetery on Second Street, where the Gouverneurs chose to inter Monroe in their family vault. He was one of the first to be interred in this new burial ground, states the cemetery website.

The Marble Cemetery, not to be confused with the other Marble Cemetery on Second Avenue, still exists on Second Street between First and Second Avenues. In 1831, however, its borders were beyond city limits and was “well into the suburbs,” according to George Morgan in his 1921 book The Life of James Monroe.

“Monroe was the third of the first five Presidents to die on the Fourth of July; John Adams and Thomas Jefferson had died on that day five years earlier,” wrote historian Daniel Preston on the website of the University of Virginia’s Miller Center. “Thousands of mourners followed his hearse up Broadway in Manhattan to the Gouverneur family vault in Marble Cemetery, while church bells tolled and guns fired at Fort Columbus [on Governors Island].”

For almost three decades, Monroe’s remains lay in the Gouverneur vault at the New York City Marble Cemetery, which was soon surrounded by buildings in the booming city. In 1857, a group of Virginians living in Gotham decided to erect a monument over the vault, per the cemetery website.

A year later, the state of Virginia decided Monroe should be brought home.

“In 1858, the 100th anniversary of [Monroe’s] birth, municipal officials and representatives of the State of Virginia decided that the remains should be returned to his home State for reburial,” wrote the National Park Service (NPS). “The Virginia legislature appropriated funds for this purpose.”

New York City officials relented, exhuming Monroe’s body from the Marble Cemetery (above, today) and sending it by steamboat to Richmond. On July 5 of that year, Monroe’s remains were interred “on a high bluff overlooking the James River, in Richmond’s Hollywood Cemetery,” stated the NPS.

That leaves just one ex-President laid to rest in New York City: Ulysses S. Grant, whose body was sealed inside the tomb named in his honor in Riverside Park in 1897.

[Second image: Whitehousehistory.org; third image: Frank Leslie’s Popular Monthly, 1877; fourth image: getarchive.com]

Tags: James Monroe Buried in NYC Marble Cemetery, James Monroe Gouverneur Family New York City, James Monroe Marble Cemetery New York City, James Monroe Prince Street NYC, Marble Cemetery Second Street East Village, Presidents Buried in New York City