Jaromil Jires, who has died aged 65, was one of that generation of Czechoslovak film directors who got their first start between 1962 and 1968. Among the most prominent were Milos Forman, Ivan Passer, Jan Nemec, Vera Chytilova and Jiri Menzel, and - influenced by the French new wave - most of them reacted against the conformist films of the Stalinist era, drawing on everyday life in a realistic manner.

After the Soviet-led invasion of 1968, some emigrated, some faded and others, like Jires, kept on working through the period of stagnation.

Ironically, his best film, Valerie And Her Week Of Wonders, appeared in 1970 during that undistinguished era. With this movie, Jires moved a great distance from his early, simple narratives to join that school of Czech filmmakers, still prevalent today, with a penchant for the bizarre and fantastical.

Born in Bratislava, Jires studied at the famous Prague film school, Famu, graduating in photography and direction. He worked with the Magic Lantern theatre from 1960-62, before making his first feature, The Cry (1963), for the Barrandov Studios. It tells of a couple on the day their baby is born, as the new father encounters every kind of threat and intolerance, but emerges still believing in a better world. Full of charm and youthful vitality, the film was constructed in a fragmentary manner and shot in a cinema verité style. According to Jires, it expressed a time "when people's most intimate experiences are connected with the major currents of world events".

During the Prague Spring of 1968, just before the Soviet tanks rolled into Czechoslovakia, Jires made The Joke, an adaptation from Milan Kundera's satirical novel about a man sent to an army camp after a political joke of his misfires. "Optimism is the opium of the people," claims the hero. Unfortunately, the authorities did not see the joke, and the film remained in the vaults for more than two decades.

No wonder Jires moved into the safer world of arts documentaries, mainly about opera and ballet, in the 1970s - though not before he made Valerie And Her Week of Wonders. The story of a 13-year-old girl who saves her grandmother, accused of witchcraft, from the stake by means of magic earrings, was made up of images mystical, religious, sexual, brutal and romantic. Jires said that what attracted him to the source novel was "the juncture of reality and dream, and the playful struggle between horror and humour".

A few cautious features followed in the 1970s, culminating with Payment In Kind (1979), about an ageing lawyer who comes out of retirement to help a small Moravian community fight bureaucracy. Well acted and well observed as it is, all the characters just seem too nice, and there is a vein of sentimentality running through the film. Like many of his contemporaries who continued directing in Czechoslovakia during the years before the Velvet revolution, Jires had crept into the more cosy corners of filmmaking.

He returned to the international scene in 1991 with The Labyrinth, starring Maximilian Schell as a director investigating the historical persecution of the Jews. Stylish and provocative, it also starred Christopher Chaplin, Charlie's son, as Kafka. After that, however, illness, following a serious car accident, prevented Jires from returning to similar audacious subjects.

He is survived by his wife, Hana Jiresova, and two children.