Q1. Bihari language belong to Indo-Aryan, Dravidian, Sino-Tibetan, Negroid Q2. Bihari literature shaped by Raja Radhika Raman Sinha, Acharya Ramlochan Saran, Acharya Shivpujan Sahay All of the above Q3. Nalanda- The world’s first seat of higher learning, a Monastic University which flourished from the _________-is in Bihar. 4th to the 11th century 5th to the 10th century … Read more

History of modern Bihar after independence The first Bihar governments in 1946 were led by two eminent leaders Sri Babu (Dr. Sri Krishna Sinha) and Anugrah Babu (Dr. Anugrah Narayan Sinha) who were men of unimpeachable integrity and great public spirit.They ran an exemplary government in Bihar. After Independence of India, the power was shared … Read more

Geographical location of Bihar:- Introduction:- Bihar is a land locked state lying in the eastern part of India although the outlet to the sea through the port of Kolkata is not far away. Bihar lies mid-way between the humid West Bengal in the east and the sub humid Uttar Pradesh in the west which provides … Read more

Infrastructure of Bihar 2 INFRASTRUCTURE AND INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT A sound infrastructural base is a key for economic development. The availability of adequate infrastructure not only promotes rapid industrialization, it also improves the quality of life of the people. Therefore, the state government is very much focused on development of high quality infrastructure to sustain the … Read more

INDUSTRIAL SCENARIO IN BIHAR Located in India’s eastern part, Bihar, the third largest state in the country in terms of population and 12thlargest in area, is surrounded by Nepal in the north, West Bengal in the east, Uttar Pradesh in the west and Jharkhand in the south. The state enjoys a great geographical advantage by … Read more

Nawada Nawada district is one of the thirty-seven districts of Bihar state, India, and Nawada town is the administrative headquarters of this district. Nawada district occupies an area of 2492 km² and has a population of 1,809,425 (as of 2001). Headquarters: Nawadah Area: 2,494 km Population: Total: 1359694 Rural: 1265138 Urban: 94556 Sub Divisions: Nawadah, Rajauli Blocks: Kauakol,Varsaliganj, Nawadah, … Read more

Gopalganj Gopalganj is a town, municipality and headquarters of Gopalganj district in the Indian state of Bihar. Modern District of Gopalganj was established on October 2, 1973. Gopalganj district covers 2,033 square kilometres (785 sq mi) in area and ranks as the 26th largest district in the state of Bihar. The district is mostly plains and fertile land. In the district’s western part, the Gandak river flows southwards. It … Read more

Araria Araria is situated at the southern part of Purnia and Medhepura in Bihar. Borders of Araria are surrounded by Nepal in northern side, Kishanganj in western side and Supaul at south-eastern side. The district came into existence by division of Purnia district on Makar-Sankranti day of 1990. District border is adjacent to border of Nepal, … Read more

BIHAR Bihar CM to embark on ‘Samiksha Yatra’ from December 12 Bihar CM Nitish Kumar is set to embark on yet another state-wide ‘yatra’ (tour) from December 12 to take peoples’ feedback on the state government’s ongoing development works. To be completed in several phases, the first leg of the month-long tour programme, named as ‘Vikas … Read more

Workers, Peasant and Tribal Movements in Bihar The peasant movements for agrarian reforms in India have always been centred on the issue of land ownership and land distribution. The term ‘peasant’ includes tenant, sharecropper, small farmer not regularly employed, hired labour, and landless labourers. Several peasant movements rose over economic questions all through the British … Read more