This piece contains spoilers for 2018 Argentine film ‘El Ángel’. Read at your own risk.

“My mother couldn’t conceive until the doctor said to her: ‘Go on and pray to God, ma’am. He gives to the world what the world needs. So here I am. Straight from heaven, a spy for God.” If biblical mythos says that Satan was the most beautiful angel before the fall, the parallelism is clear in the voiceover that introduces us to the main character Carlitos (Lorenzo Ferro), the pouty tousle-haired sociopath at the center of Argentine director Luis Ortega’s El Ángel. As he talks, Carlitos meanders an opulent house he just broke into, before proceeding to dance to La Joven Guardia’s classic track “El extraño de pelo largo.” He leaves the house toting a few gold chains taken from a night stand, a motorcycle, and a handful of records.

Taking inspiration from the true story of Argentine serial killer and the continent’s longest-serving prisoner Carlos Robledo Puch, the film follows a young man with a penchant for theft in ’70s Buenos Aires before he quickly spirals into a prolific, cold-blooded killer. The music in this film, near-Scorsesian in its execution and timing, is an exploration of Argentina in the ’60s and ’70s that’s as steeped in rock nacional deep cuts as it is in the tango.

The soundtrack is rife with references to Argentine rock predecessors, such as La Pesada del Rock and Roll and Pappo (although fellow pioneer and rock nacional heavyweight Luis Alberto Spinetta is noticeably absent), as well as softer cuts by way of tango grandmaster Astor Piazzola and lite-rocker Heleno. In its review, The New York Times stated the film lacked depth and blamed it for not criticizing Carlitos’ murderous instincts and amorality, and instead exploiting them for aesthetics – this takes away from the sounds that help guide the film along, the anthems of revolution made in response to the dictatorship that held Argentina in its grasp.

But the eloquent dance between the escalating murder spree, and the soundtrack provides a music video-like narrative that helps move the film along at a perfect pace.

Below, we break down the “El Ángel” soundtrack, and walk you through this robust, hedonistic time in music that molded the mind of a young man who would become one of the most infamous criminals in Argentine history.