Maharashtra-Torrent Power is a 126MW onshore wind power project. It is located in Maharashtra, India. The project is currently active. It has been developed in single phase. Post completion of construction, the project got commissioned in 2020.

Project Type Total Capacity (MW) Active Capacity (MW) Pipeline Capacity (MW) Project Status Project Location Project Developer Onshore 126 126 – Active Maharashtra, India Torrent Power

Description

The project is developed and owned by Torrent Power.

The project cost is $122.648m.

The wind power project consists of 63 turbines, each with 2MW nameplate capacity.

Development Status

The project is currently active. The project got commissioned in 2020.

Power Purchase Agreement

The power generated from the project is sold to Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution under a power purchase agreement. The power is sold at the rate of $0.044kWh for a period of 25 years. The contracted capacity is 124.4MW.

About Torrent Power

Torrent Power Ltd (Torrent Power), a subsidiary of Torrent Group, is a power utility that generates, transmits and distributes electricity. The company generates electricity through gas based, coal based and renewable power plants. It transmits and distributes power to residential, commercial and industrial customers in Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, Surat and Dahej SEZ as well as Dholera SIR in Gujarat; Bhiwandi in Maharashtra; and in Agra in Uttar Pradesh. The company offers highly personalized as well as innovative customer services for better experience and customer satisfaction. It also manufactures cables through its cables manufacturing unit at Nadiad, Gujarat. Torrent Power is headquartered in Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.

Methodology

All power projects included in this report are drawn from GlobalData’s Power Intelligence Center. The information regarding the project parameters is sourced through secondary information sources such as electric utilities, equipment manufacturers, developers, project proponent’s – news, deals and financial reporting, regulatory body, associations, government planning reports and publications. Wherever needed the information is further validated through primary from various stakeholders across the power value chain and professionals from leading players within the power sector.