Torrent Power is one of the leading brands in the Indian power sector, promoted by the Rs. 9592 crore Torrent Group – a group committed to its mission of transforming life by serving two of the most critical needs - healthcare and power. Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd., the flagship company of the Torrent Group, is a major player in the Indian pharmaceuticals industry with a vision of becoming a global entity in the arena.

With an all-round experience in generation, transmission and distribution of power, and a proven track record of implementing large power projects, Torrent Power is the most experienced private sector player in Gujarat.

Torrent Power foresaw the prospects in the power sector much before the liberalization, when it took-over an ailing power cable company in 1989 (now known as Torrent Cables Limited) and successfully turned it around.

The high points of Torrent’s foray into power however were the acquisitions of two of the India’s oldest utilities – The Surat Electricity Company Ltd and The Ahmedabad Electricity Company Ltd. Torrent turned them into first rate power utilities comparable with the best, in terms of operational efficiencies and reliability of power supply.

Torrent has a generation capacity of 1647.5 MW and distributes power to more than 3 million customers annually in Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, Surat, Bhiwandi and Agra.

The company is currently implementing a 1200 MW gas based power project at Dahej in South Gujarat. The project, called the DGEN Power Project, is being implemented in a phased manner starting with a 400 MW first phase. It is also in the process of expanding the capacity of its SUGEN plant near Surat.

Distribution Franchise business is one area which Torrent Power has been aggressively pursuing as part of its expansion plans. Torrent Power created history by entering into the country’s first distribution franchisee agreement with Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited for Bhiwandi Circle in December 2006. It has also been awarded the distribution franchise for Agra and Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh and has already commenced distribution operations in Agra.