Business Strategist, Consultant & Mentor. Working with range of companies from start-ups and non-profits to the Fortune 100. Worked with and consulted brands such as BMW, DELL, Disney, Hilton, State Farm, Wells Fargo, and Zappos - to name a few! I am also a Strategic Thinking Partner for entrepreneurs, nonprofits and business owners, with the expertise to quickly get to the heart of complex issues, seeing solutions and helping to illuminate a path to forward progress. Unique Value Proposition: I have three things that make me a valuable strategic thinking partner for you: 1. I've had extensive day-to-day business experience with a range of companies from start-ups to the Fortune 100. 2. I have a broad network to help you get there quicker and more efficiently. My friends and colleagues include leaders from a variety of industries, which gives me insider access to what is actually happening across business and industry lines. 3. As a business owner, I know the challenges business owners face. I've seen their common mistakes and common successes. I know what works and what doesn't. Areas of focus: Startups Getting Started as an Entrepreneur Corporate Sponsorships (For profit and non-profit) Crowdfunding (indiegogo, kickstarter, etc) Online Product Launches How to get sponsored Publishing (books, kindle) Online Marketing Strategy Internet Marketing Learn more about Roberto at: http://robertocandelaria.com Want to learn how to get sponsored? Maybe you are ready to get sponsored? Get your free Sponsorship E-Course at www.Sponsor101.com

⭐️ 4X Bestselling Author ⭐️ Co-Founder of www.PromoNation.co (Promo Nation Inc.) ⭐️ Over 25 million views on YouTube channel ⭐️ 2 million Followers across 30 social media accounts ⭐️ Influencer with 500k+ followers ⭐️ Host of a trending social movement with 6million+ hashtag shares (trended On Twitter 5,000+ times since 2014)! *ABOUT* I have significant experience in marketing, business, startups, growth, increasing sales, revenue generation in all forms, marketing strategy, business strategy, launch tactics, and more. I've been an entrepreneur since age 17, and I semi-retired at age 32. I now travel the world, making money and having fun. *WHY YOU NEED A CALL* ⭐️ I've helped over 2,000 early-stage, established, and emerging businesses globally. ⭐️ I'm solely on Clarity.fm to give a small portion of my time at a highly subsidized rate, to EMPOWER and impact entrepreneurs' businesses to achieve their greatest goals and potential. One-on-One consulting with me is at a much higher rate. Clarity is my way of giving back.

Sales leader and Silicon Valley veteran. Founding team at Close.io, ElasticSales Built multiple profitable 7-Figure Saas businesses. I have made over 20,000+ cold calls, sent countless emails, and closed millions of dollars in deals in my sales career. I've sold to VPs and C-Level executives in Fortune 500 companies as well as doctors, lawyers, and even restaurant owners. Thanks to thousands of sales conversations in dozens of industries, I’ve learned that Sales is fundamentally very simple - It is result-driven communication The best salespeople are the best communicators, who know how to listen, understand a prospect's needs, build trust, and help them make mutually beneficial decisions. I've also learned that there is no magic bullet to building a successful playbook. The best sales leaders take a data-driven iterative approach, testing a multitude of sales strategies to find a unique combination with the highest ROI for a given business. I help founders and sales leaders become great at Sales and build a successful go-to-market strategy maximized for their unique business.

You need to talk to me if you are currently: writing a business plan, raising money, trying to launch or grow your startup, hitting a wall getting traction or funding, feeling overwhelmed and need help focusing your energy. I have deep experience in entrepreneurship, startups, writing business plans, raising money, venture capital and private equity, marketing and brand management, and general business strategy. As Venture Partner at Texas Venture Labs, I've worked with over 50 startups across all industries that have raised over $50M in the last 3 years. I have evaluated hundreds of business plans and judged in multiple investment competitions. I know what investors look for and how to show it to them. I have experience on both sides of the table. I started and sold a company and I just closed a seven figure round for my next startup. I have an MBA from the McCombs School of Business at The University of Texas.

My 25-year entrepreneurial journey was probably inspired by my first venture into entrepreneurship many years before. I developed my first “app” using COBOL to manage the payroll at my part-time bar job while at university. It was even sold on a monthly subscription, a concept ahead of its time. I put my tech entrepreneurial ambitions on hold for the next decade while pursuing my sports passion, playing professional rugby league for the Parramatta Eels and the Balmain Tigers. Then, in 2001, amidst the Dot Com Boom, I founded MassMedia Studios, a digital agency driven by the drive to create innovative products and SaaS platforms. Our standout creation was the Traction Platform, a pioneering marketing automation tool. We expanded Traction globally with offices in New York and London. Simultaneously, we launched 2and2, an e-learning company specialising in creative e-learning products. In 2007, I successfully sold MassMedia and Traction, businesses experiencing 30% YoY growth and boasting clients like Unilever, Audi, and Diageo. My involvement continued with 2and2 as a non-executive director, which has now evolved into Cogniss, a no-code ecosystem to develop consumer and patient-facing digital health solutions based in the UK poised for substantial growth. Before founding Drive Yello in 2014, I ventured into Feverpitch Entertainment, a content creation company, and AppVillage, a virtual mobile app incubator. Drive Yello rekindled my focus on B2B platforms, which has remained my central pursuit for the past ten years. At the heart of the Drive Yello business is the ‘Yello’ platform, the smartest logistics platform that connects retailers to independent couriers to streamline deliveries for millions of Australians nationwide. In 2023, I founded the 4You Innovation Group, which is focused on developing technology and services to enable retailers to meet the ever-increasing demand for convenience. In line with this mission, we acquired the Hey You business, an order-ahead application targeting restaurants and cafes. I recently stepped down from my CEO role but remain on the board as a fractional executive working with the management and product teams. With a history of innovative product development and industry disruption, I have successfully built my career on being passionate about solving business problems with technology, developing teams, creating innovative products and initiating change in diverse industries. Steve Fanale has over 20 years of experience as a tech entrepreneur. He is the Founding CEO of Drive Yello, his 6th start-up, one of Australia’s leading last-mile delivery platform businesses. At the heart of the Drive Yello business is the ‘Yello’ platform, the smartest logistics platform that connects retailers to independent couriers to streamline deliveries for millions of Australians nationwide. With a history of innovative product development and industry disruption, Steve has successfully built his career on being passionate about solving business problems with technology, developing teams, creating innovative products and initiating change in any industry he chooses to get involved in. In line with this passion, Steve has recently formed the 4You Innovation Group, which is focused on building technology and services to enable retailers to meet the ever-increasing demand for convenience.

"Attila is one of the most well-prepared experts I've had the chance to work with. He is a key player of the international startup studio scene, and the knowledge he brought to the table was essential when developing the investment structure of Studio One, the first private fund that exclusively invests in startup studio ventures..." Gergely Freész, CEO at Studio One Attila has 5+ years and 10000+ hours experience of researching, building and operating startup studios, venture builders. He was Chief Operating Officer & EIR @ Drukka, he authored the Startup Studio Playbook and is an Advisor to Startup Studios: + Transformed a 12-people agency into a 50+ strong studio with 20+ startups + Nurtured 12+ startups and founders, from zero to spinoff + Organized the Studio One Pre-Seed Fund (EUR 300k) + Participated in the Intellitext Seed Fund (EUR 1,5M) + Negotiated Seed and Series A rounds for 4 portfolio companies + Co-created AHA Brain Store corporate studio initiative + Organized the Progress Bar meetup series (local ecosystem outreach) As Advisor he worked with studios, government innovation agencies and corporations from Europe, North and South America, MENA and Asia. Areas of cooperation: + Strategy creation and review + Venture production process build + Fundraising and investor management + EIR and Founder programs + Leadership support + Ecosystem outreach initiatives Advantages in working with Attila: + Saves research and leadership time + Better overview of alternatives leading to better decisions + Reducing risks and increasing success in designing and running a studio

DBA (c) SSBM Geneva | International Speaker | Global Business Strategy & Blockchain Lawyer | Patent Attorney | Corporate Coach & Trainer | Crypto Token Legal Opinion | B-School Faculty | Global Economy & Emerging Markets I have issued several legal opinions (LO) regarding token qualifications over the past few years covering all the major jurisdictions covering Singapore, HK, UK, USA, Malta, Nevis, BVI etc, which have been used by clients across various exchanges globally. As founder of HashChain Consulting Group LLC (USA) and a doctoral research scholar (Focus areas: Blockchain, Crypto, Law and Data Science), at SSBM Geneva , I work closely with clients to execute legal opinion projects across global markets, including additional services like exchange submission documents, investor agreements, blockchain patents, international trademarks etc. International Speaker, Author, Blogger, Technology Savvy Patent Attorney & Corporate Lawyer with 15+ years of work experience in Asia Pacific, US & Europe Strong technical background with specialisation in Cross-border Mergers & Acquisitions, Joint Ventures, Foreign Direct Investment, Tech Transactions, Patent Protection, Patent Licensing, Patent Claims Drafting, Patent Specification Writing, Patent Enforcement Quoted in and contributed to 50+ national & international publications (Bloomberg, FirstPost, SwissInfo, Outlook Money, Yahoo News, Times of India, Economic Times, Business Standard, Quartz, Global Legal Post, International Bar Association, LawAsia, BioSpectrum Asia, Digital News Asia, e27, Leaders Speak, Entrepreneur India, VCCircle, AutoTech) Regularly invited to speak at international & national platforms (conferences, TV channels, seminars, corporate trainings, government workshops) on technology, patents, business strategy, legal developments, leadership & management Working with global patent attorneys, corporate lawyers & major international law firms for representing leading clients worldwide (corporations, universities, startups, investors) in diverse industry sectors (Aviation, Food & Beverage, FMCG, Pharma, Biotech, Healthcare, Finance, Artificial Intelligence, B2B & B2C Digital Tech, Telecommunications, Software, Mobile Apps, 3D Printing, Drones, FinTech, Fashion, Sports, Industrial Manufacturing, Chemicals, Semiconductors, Optics, Blockchain, Nutraceuticals, Clean Energy, Agriculture, Travel, Medical Devices, Gaming Platforms, Social Networking, Nanotechnology, Data Analytics, Chat bots, Internet of Things (IoT), Wearables, Driverless Cars, Virtual & Augmented Reality, Mobile Payments, High Tech) Expertise – Patent Strategy, Intellectual Property Portfolio Creation & Management (Designs, Copyrights, Trademarks, Brands), Due Diligence, Corporate Structuring, International Business Strategy (Shareholding, IP ownership, Agreements & Contracts) Rahul Dev is a patent attorney and technology corporate lawyer with expertise in incorporating and expanding businesses across Asia for serving clients in the US, Europe, UK and Asia Pacific. Rahul is regularly invited to speak at various international conferences and to conduct workshops for private and public sector, including senior government officials, corporations, executives, students, entrepreneurs and startups. His strong technical background combined with comprehensive business and legal skills form backbone of his global consulting services. Technology Savvy Patent Attorney & Corporate Lawyer with 10+ years of experience in Asia Pacific, US & Europe International Speaker, Author & Blogger with expertise in Law Firm Leadership & Practice Management Strong technical background with specialisation in Patent Protection, Licensing & Enforcement, Cross-border Mergers & Acquisitions, Joint Ventures, Foreign Direct Investment & Tech Transactions in South East Asia covering consulting for global patent Attorneys: Patent drafting & filing for B2C & B2B digital products Protection of Mobile App’s Intellectual Property via Patents, Copyrights, Website Terms & Vendor Contracts Wearable device’s patent portfolio protecting hardware, dashboard, app & data analytics software Medical device patentability analysis, prior art search, provisional & complete patent drafting, patent claims & patent drawings, patent filing in India, PCT, USPTO & EPO, responding to USPTO, UKIPO, MyIPO (Malaysia) & SIPO (Singapore) office actions Patent Landscape & Patentability Studies for innovations in Artificial Intelligence (AI & Chat bots), Internet of Things (IoT), Wearables, Driverless Cars, Virtual & Augmented Reality, 3D Printing, Drones, Mobile Payments (Digital Wallet) & FinTech Assisting Clients with Complex Patent Issues: Patent Searches, Patent Drafting, Patent Filing, Patent Office Examinations, Patent Prosecution, Patent Due Diligence & Patent Litigation Strategy Patent Strategy for International Patents, USPTO Filings, Drafting Office Action Response, Patent Reexaminations & Reissue Proceedings, Appeals to PTAB, Patent Office Trials, Inter Partes Review, Post-grant Review, Covered Business Method Patents, Interferences, Derivations & Appeals of PTAB Trial Decisions European Patent Practice, Patent Oppositions, Appeals, EPO Third Party Observations, Central Limitation and Revocation, Supplementary Protection Certificates (SPC) & United Kingdom (UK) Patent Practice Advisory Contact: http://clarity.fm/rdpatentlawyer Specialties: Litigation, Patent Litigation, Patent Infringement, Corporate & IP Strategy, Startups: Incorporation, Funding, Brand Management, Contracts & Agreements, Legal Research, SWOT, Corporate Governance, Due-diligence, Mergers & Acquisitions, Antitrust & Competition Laws, Regulatory Affairs, Freedom-to-Operate, Patent Drafting, Claim Drafting, Patent Searches, Office Actions Response, USPTO Patent appeal briefs, Patent Invalidation Analysis, Patent Opposition, Product-Claim Mapping, Patent Enforcement

Are you ready to take your affiliate marketing game to the next level? Look no further! You've stumbled upon a true affiliate marketing guru with over 13 years of experience in the industry. My expertise covers a wide range of areas including CPA marketing, PPC, social media, pop and push advertising, and native advertising. As a highly sought-after speaker, I've taken the stage at some of the biggest affiliate marketing conferences in the world including Affiliate World Asia, Affiliate World Dubai, Affiliate World Barcelona, Arab Affiliate Summit, and more. I've also had the privilege of guest lecturing at the prestigious University of Washington virtually. But my passion for affiliate marketing doesn't stop there. I'm also the proud owner of one of the most well-known blogs in the CPA marketing industry called KJ Rocker, and host a popular podcast in the industry called Chai with KJ. My experience extends beyond just speaking and content creation. I've launched my own successful affiliate offers and provided invaluable consultancy services to affiliate networks and vendors looking to advertise their products through affiliate networks. Are you ready to take your affiliate marketing campaigns to new heights? Let's hop on a call and get started today! Together, we'll plan, execute and optimize your campaigns for maximum success.

Hello! My name is Shaun Nestor. I help smart leaders and entrepreneurs who feel lost, overwhelmed, or frustrated by all of the challenges of running a business. I bring clarity and organization to leaders who want to position their companies for success in the future. Are you struggling with how to prove the value of your service? Are you getting paid what you're worth? Are you pitching your products in a way that makes the client beg to sign on the dotted line? I know where you are coming from! I have operated my own agency for over 15 years and have experienced the same pains. Let me encourage you: there is a way to reach your goals and have peace of mind to grow your brand. I train multi-person agencies, freelancers, and independent consultants who want more and are willing to work to achieve it. If you don't have a clear process for setting client expectations early, getting paid what you're worth, or proving your value, I want to help you. Drop me a note today: hello@shaunnestor.com

Rachel is an indie game developer, writer, tax law expert, business and B2B/B2C marketing adviser and content strategist, and freelancing coach. In short, she's a professional hustler who loves to help other people develop fulfilling careers and attain both financial freedom and self-worth. As an IRS-licensed Enrolled Agent with a decade of practice experience, she wrote the first and only tax law book dedicated to indie developers and has frequently been called upon in the industry for her perspective on game dev tax matters. She teaches the best-selling Basics of Business For Indie Developers and Taxes For Indie Developers classes at Playcrafting NYC, and has spoken at Indiecade East, East Coast Game Developers' Conference, IGDA events, and guest-lectured at MBA programs on the business of games and career development for the self-employed. As CFO and Executive Producer of Himalaya Studios, Rachel oversaw their six-figure Kickstarter campaign and has advised game developers, publishers, and clients in other industries on how to form a successful campaign. Rachel resigned from the company in 2017 to focus on Sonic Toad Media & Consulting's coaching and writing services arms which currently lay the foundation for Sonic Toad Publishing. Frequently featured on the front page of Gamasutra, Rachel writes about business and lifestyle issues for game developers on the noted industry rag and is also an accomplished ghost-blogger. She effectively developed active and passive income streams that have enabled her to pursue game development without a full-time or part-time job and has made it a mission of Sonic Toad Consulting to help other indie developers and creative people do the same. Rachel's strategies have helped freelance writers get paid more and indie developers transition from traditional jobs to full-time hustling and thriving in the process. Her clients will vouch for her knowledge of grassroots and email marketing that have helped their lists grow and become more effective at selling their games and services. Gamasutra Page: https://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/RachelPresser/924879/ Other Clips: rachelpresser.contently.com The Definitive Guide to Taxes for Indie Game Developers: https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0197G82MK/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&linkCode=ll1&tag=sontoamedcon-20&linkId=13df7ff020d7aad50da2d79964a02617

Why would you want to talk to Brad? Because your business is not as profitable as it could or should be. Because he is an expert at unconventional profit improvement strategies. From licensing intellectual property and strategic alliances to cutting-edge direct marketing and ecommerce techniques. Brad is a 7 time bestselling publisher and expert at highly targeted marketing and copywriting strategies. You talk to Brad when you're stuck. When you are looking for simple solutions to complex business growth problems. He has started, funded and sold several companies. He has lost it all and gained it back. He understands how to apply leverage and create or reveal opportunities that others miss. He is an accomplished real estate investor, marketing maven and entrepreneurial strategist. He's addicted to learning and has failed at more things that most people have succeeded at. Would you like a "Second Opinion On Your First Impression?" Brad's second opinion sessions have resulted in 300% increases in sales for several clients... you could be next. You can find more on Brad at https://www.bradcostanzo.com Or on his Podcast at http://BaconWrappedBusiness.com