Making Technology Work For You!®

OpenLink Software is at the cutting-edge of data-centric technological innovation, offering secure, high-performance, and platform-independent solutions for data access, integration, virtualization, and management. Grounded in open standards, our products offer unrivaled freedom and cost-effectiveness in the pursuit of data-driven agility. This is especially important in an ever-evolving digital realm supercharged by the latest Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) innovations.

corp

vp

vpclaim

vpdesc

vpdepiction

rank

Effective AI Evolution through HyperData Connectivity

Embrace the AI-driven digital evolution through secure & modern data access, integration, and management.

https://www.openlinksw.com/DAV/oplweb3/images/enterprise-challenges.png

1

Virtuoso Universal Server

A modern enterprise-grade platform for data access, virtualization, integration and multi-model relational database management (SQL Tables and/or RDF Statement Graphs).

Browser Extensions

A collection of sophisticated tools (YouID, OSDS, OSDE, and ODE) for productive exploitation of the immense power unleashed by Knowledge Graphs that manifest as a Semantic Web of Linked Data (across public and/or private HTTP-based networks).

Universal Data Access Drivers

Our suite of secure, high-performance, open-standards-compliant ODBC, JDBC, ADO.NET, OLE DB, and XMLA drivers (connectors)

Secure and High Performance

Delivering unrivaled security, performance, and scalability that fuels Digital Transformation based on public and private Knowledge Graphs that manifest as a Semantic Web of Linked Data.

Native Data Management Across Data Sources

Harness the native power of a modern multi-model DBMS delivered as an integral part of a Conceptual Data Virtualization solution that harmonizes interaction with heterogeneously-shaped and disparately located data.

Data Access Built With Open Standards

Retain the power to “mix and match” best of class developer and end-user tools based on top-to-bottom support of existing open standards.

Public Community Server

We offer an online discussion space for our community of end-users, power-users, integrators and developers that covers a broad range of topics and various how-to guides that include links to live demonstrations. This space is also a powerful Knowledge Graph that manifests as a Semantic Web of Linked Data, naturally.

Private Support Portal

Our Product Support Team provides world-class support for our data access and virtual database technologies. This support site comprises an exciting and extensive list of evolving Wiki Articles, Getting Started Guides, Animated Tutorials, FAQs, and other resources to assist evaluators and customers with all our products.

Consultancy Services

From the smallest problem to the largest project, we can work with you to produce good quality solutions. provides 5 forms of Consultancy in relation to Database Connectivity Technology: Strategic Consultancy; Product Specific Consultancy; Custom Development; Quickstart Days; and Technology Implementation & Deployment Services.