This needs a stretch. (Feel free to remove when satisfied of completion.)

Needed:

* Synopsis not copied on wikipedia or any other media

* Objects is incomplete

* Miscellaneous is missing details

This article is about the 2006 DTV film. For other uses, see Scooby-Doo and the Pirate (disambiguation)

Scooby-Doo! Pirates Ahoy! is the tenth in a series of direct-to-video films based upon Hanna-Barbera's Scooby-Doo Saturday morning cartoons. It was released on DVD on September 19, 2006.

Premise[]

The Mystery, Inc. gang are caught in the mystery of the Bermuda Triangle, while vacationing on a cruise, courtesy of Fred's parents for his birthday.

Synopsis[]

Astrocartographer, Rupert Garcia, is in his quarters, trying to make sense of an old, bizarre star map which he recently acquired. The ship sails into a sinister fog, and is soon engulfed. A ghostly pirate brig appears next to the ship, and zombie pirates swarm the ship. The crew disappears while Garcia hides in his quarters with the star map. The villainous Captain Skunkbeard enters the quarters, along with his first mate, the aptly named Woodenleg Wally. The pirates cannot find Garcia, who overhears that the pirates are looking for him and the map. The pirates give up the search and scuttle the ship, and return to their brig and disappear into the fog. Garcia escapes to a life raft, and is marooned on the open sea.

Characters[]

Main characters:

Mystery Inc.

Scooby-Doo

Shaggy Rogers

Fred Jones

Velma Dinkley

Daphne Blake

Supporting characters:

Rupert Garcia (only appearance)

Skip Jones (only appearance)

Peggy Jones (only appearance)

Villains:

Alien (only appearance)(Captain Crothers's disguise)

Sea Witch (only appearance)(Sunny St. Cloud's disguise)

Captain Skunkbeard (only appearance)(Biff Wellington's disguise)

Biff Wellington (only appearance)

Woodenleg Wally (only appearance)(Mr. Mysterio's disguise)

Mr. Mysterio (only appearance)

Captain Skunkbeard's miscellaneous crew (only appearance)(Miscellaneous crew and passengers' disguise)

Sea Salt Sally (only appearance)(Peggy Jones' disguise)

Peggy Jones (hypnotized)(redeemed)

Skunkbeard's lookout (only appearance)(Sunny St. Cloud's disguise)

Sunny St. Cloud (hypnotized)(redeemed)

Captain Crothers (hypnotized)(redeemed)

Miscellaneous crew and passengers (hypnotized)(redeemed)

Other characters:

Galaxy Gazer captain (only appearance)

Locations[]

Bermuda Triangle

United States

Florida

Miami

Sea port

Objects[]

Heaven's Light

Vehicles[]

The Mystery Machine

Galaxy Gazer

Poseidon

Pirate brig

Wooden raft

USS Cyclops (AC-4) (hologram)

Flight 19 planes (RC models)

Alien spaceship (RC model)

Suspects[]

Suspect Motive/Reason Captain Crothers

Sunny St. Cloud They make many montages of sloppy "mysteries".

Culprits[]

Culprit Motive/Reason Biff Wellington as Captain Skunkbeard To go back in time. Mr. Mysterio as Woodenleg Wally To get a gold meteor.

Cast[]

Frank Welker Scooby-Doo

Fred Jones

Alien

Ghost Pirate crew Casey Kasem Shaggy Rogers

Ghost Pirate crew Mindy Cohn Velma Dinkley

Ghost Pirate crew Grey DeLisle Daphne Blake

Ghost Pirate crew Ron Perlman Biff Wellington

Captain Skunkbeard Freddy Rodriguez Rupert Garcia

Ghost Pirate crew Tim Conway Skip Jones

Ghost Pirate Crew Edie McClurg Peggy Jones

Sea Salt Sally Kathy Najimy Sunny St. Cloud

Skunkbeard's lookout Arsenio Hall Captain Crothers

Ghost Pirate crew Dan Castellaneta Mr. Mysterio

Woodenleg Wally

Songs[]

Song Credits Performed by "Run For The Hills" Music by Steven Argila

Lyrics by Paul James Prendergast

Produced by Steven Argila, Stephen Krause & Paul James Prendergast Paul James Prendergast "Blow Ye Winds" "That's The Way We Go "A Pirating We Go" "A Pirate's Life" Written and produced by Rich Dickerson and Gigi Meroni Rich Dickerson and Gigi Meroni

Continuity[]

When Shaggy mentions a vacation without "Ghosts, aliens, mummies or possessed Tikis", he references past DTV movies such as Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders, Scooby-Doo! in Where's My Mummy? and Aloha, Scooby-Doo!.

Notes/Trivia[]

There are several passengers on the Poseidon who re-use models from characters that previously appeared in either What's New, Scooby-Doo? or one of the other DTVs during that period, these include:

Lloyd Mbuku from the episode, Safari, So Goodi! and Alexandra Viggi from the episode, Pompeii and Circumstance, are among the crowd who confront the gang about solving all their mysteries in two days.

At the dinner on the cruise, the glasses wearing citizen of the Lost City from Scooby-Doo! in Where's My Mummy? and a Portugese soldier from Aloha, Scooby-Doo! can be seen.

Sisters, Chris and Terry.

This is the fourth time the gang has encountered a ghost pirate.

While driving to the mystery cruise ship, the gang asks Freddie how old he will be turning. Freddie, not paying attention, calls out "43...44, 45" as he counts the pier numbers they are driving by. This is an in-joke to the many iterations of Scooby-Doo always depicting the gang as in their teens or at most in their early 20s. If one were to count the years Fred existed as a cartoon character, he debuted in Scooby-Doo, Where Are You! in 1969, and this movie was made in 2006. That would actually make him 37 years old. (Although as a cartoon character he perpetually keeps his youth). This isn't an accurate age though, since he was already 15-18 when the series started.

Fred is revealed to be very muscular while being shirtless in the mystery cruise ship's pool; he has washboard abs, a chiseled chest, and very toned muscles.

This is the first known time Scooby and Shaggy are resistant to hypnosis, possibly either to do with past experience or the fact they're incompetent, making them resist hypnosis.

During the montage where Sunny St. Cloud and Captain Crothers dress up like monsters for Scooby and the gang to catch, they dress up like the following monsters from episodes of Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!.

The Ghost of Captain Cutler from A Clue for Scooby Doo

The Ghost Clown from Bedlam in the Big Top

The Werewolf from Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Werewolf, however he has the color scheme of the Werewolf from A Gaggle of Galloping Ghosts.

While selecting a unique costume theme for dinner, Shaggy and Scooby ultimately dress up as Daphne and Velma in their Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!, respectively. They would do this again in Scooby-Doo! and the Goblin King.

When Shaggy and Scooby dress as Daphne and Velma to Sunny St. Cloud, an instrumental of the theme song for The New Scooby-Doo Movies briefly plays.

At the end of the movie, Shaggy mentions a run-in with the Abominable Snowman, which they do in the next movie, Chill Out, Scooby-Doo!

If the USS Cyclops was missing for a hundred years, it would have been in 1906 while in real life, it launched in 1910 and disappeared in 1918.

Sunny's character and appearance might have been influenced/inspired by the character Julie McCoy from The Love Boat.

The alien (which was revealed to be a disguise worn by Captain Crothers) bares a slight resemblance to the fake aliens from the movie Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders.

Miscellaneous[]

Disguises: Shaggy and Scooby as cleaners on the ship; Shaggy and Scooby as pirates, Fred and Daphne as aliens.

Traps:

Clues:

Scooby Snacks bribe: 0

"Ruh-roh" count: 0

"Zoinks" count: 2

"Jeepers" count: 1

"Jinkies" count: 2

Adaptations[]

Scholastic published two versions: A standard novel-type and a 8x8 book.

Dalmatian Press also published an adaptation called Pirates Ahoy!

Animation mistakes and/or technical glitches[]

When the ghost pirates attack the Galaxy Gazer at the beginning of the movie, Rupert swings his door open into the passage outside. When he sees the pirate ship with cannons at the ready pull up beside, he backs up and slams his door shut from the inside.

When Daphne and Velma encounter the Sea Witch, her right arm is made impossibly thin compared to the rest of her body. It returns to normal in the next scene and the few others she's in.

During the "Blow Ye Winds" chase scene, when one of the ghost pirates cuts a table, it vanishes for a few frames before appearing again.

Inconsistencies/continuity errors and/or goofs/oddities[]

When Daphne is first in view in the Mystery Machine, she's clearly sitting regularly, but when it switches to up-close, she's in the middle of painting her toenails.

Daphne is barefoot while in the Mystery Machine, but when she gets out she is not only wearing her shoes but also her full-length stockings/tights.

The name on the vessel of Poseidon was originally called Poseidon's Paradise. After it's out of dock, the name disappears, and from then on its simply referred to as Poseidon.

Skunkbeard's ship's size seems to change from colossal (while grappling the cruise ship) to the size of a small brig (during the last scenes). A ship from that time period would certainly be nowhere near as large as a modern cruise ship.

The pirates' motive for attacking the cruise ship was a reach at best. One could argue that Skunkbeard knew he needed Rupert to decode the map, but captured Skip instead because he was wearing the castaway clothes. But how did they know he was cast adrift (and not drowned) when his ship went down? How did they know he was rescued by that ship? Wellington arrived after Rupert was taken below deck. Why didn't they come back to search for him when they found he wasn't among the captives? Surely, Mysterio could have asked Rupert's crewmates what he looked like.

When Skunkbeard and Wally are searching Rupert's modest-sized quarters for him, what are the odds they wouldn't look under that bed?

It's simply impossible for a few solid cannonballs to sink a ship with the size and structure integrity of a modern cruise ship, like the Poseidon. Even with some damage, it should still have more than enough momentum and speed to ram Skunkbeard's ship (with the disastrous consequences to the latter).

When Scooby opens a pot, a lobster pinches his nose. The lobster is red, and lobsters get their red color after being boiled. Live lobsters are a dark greenish-brown color.

In other languages[]

Language Title Meaning Croatian Scooby-Doo! Pirati dolaze! Scooby-Doo! Pirates Are Coming! French Scooby-Doo et le Triangle des Bermudes Scooby-Doo and bermuda Triangle Greek Ο Scooby-Doo και οι πειρατές Scooby-Doo and the Pirates Hungarian Scooby-Doo! Kalózok a láthatáron! Scooby-Doo! Pirates in Sight Italian Scooby-Doo e i pirati dei Caraibi Scooby-Doo and the Pirates of Caribbean Portuguese (Brazilian) Scooby-Doo - Piratas à Vista Scooby-Doo! Pirates in Sight Polish Scooby-Doo: Ahoj Piraci! Scooby-Doo! Ahoy, Pirates! Romanian Scooby-Doo și Pirații Ahoy Scooby-Doo and the Pirates Ahoy Russian Скуби-Ду! Пираты на борту! Scooby-Doo! Pirates on Board! Spanish (Latin America) Scooby-Doo! ¡Piratas a la vista! Scooby-Doo! Pirates in Sight! Spanish (Spain) Scooby-Doo! ¡Piratas a babor! Scooby-Doo! Pirates Ahoy! Turkish Scooby Doo: Korsanın Sırrı Scooby-Doo: The Pirate's Secret

Home media[]

Scooby-Doo! Pirates Ahoy! DVD released by Warner Home Video on September 19, 2006.

Scooby-Doo! Pirates Ahoy! DVD re-released by Warner Home Video on July 25, 2016.

Quotes[]

Gallery[]

Videos[]

Images[]

[]