1980 Supply & Demand

Ben and Jerry rent space in an old spool and bobbin mill on South Champlain Street in Burlington and begin packing their ice cream in pints. The reason? To distribute to grocery and Mom & Pop stores along the restaurant delivery routes Ben services out of the back of his old VW Squareback wagon.

1981 We Want More!

As the news of Ben & Jerry's spreads, more & more people want a lick. So the first franchised scoop shop opens in Shelburne, Vermont.

1982 Pack It Up!

The old gas station is demolished to create a parking lot. Just before the wrecking ball is swung, the new Ben & Jerry's on Cherry Street in Burlington is up & scooping.

1983 Now That's What I Call a Sundae

Ben & Jerry's ice cream is used to build "the world's largest ice cream sundae" in St. Albans, Vermont; the sundae weighs 27,102 pounds.

1984 Get a Scoop of the Action

Ben & Jerry's sets a precedent by discovering a little-known clause about stocks and brokering, then establish a Vermont-only public stock offering to raise money for a new manufacturing plant.

1985 The Heart of the Matter

The Ben & Jerry's Foundation is established with a gift from Ben and Jerry & 7.5% of the company's annual pre-tax profits to fund community-oriented projects.

1986 "Like the world's largest baked Alaska"

Ben & Jerry's launches the Cowmobile, a modified mobile home used to distribute free scoops in a unique, cross-country "marketing drive." On the return trip, the Cowmobile burns to the ground outside of Cleveland, Ohio (no one was hurt). Ben said it looked "like the world's largest Baked Alaska."

1987 Very Grateful

Ben & Jerry's introduces Cherry Garcia® ice cream. Named for Grateful Dead guitarist Jerry Garcia at the suggestion of two "DeadHeads" from Portland, Maine, Cherry Garcia® becomes the first ice cream named for a rock legend.

1988 Hail From the Chief

Ben and Jerry are named “U.S. Small Business Persons of the Year” by President Reagan in a White House Rose Garden ceremony. Jerry's one suit comes in handy and, luckily, Ben finds an Italian waiter's jacket to wear.

1989 Artificial Growth Hormone? Not in Our Ice Cream!

Ben & Jerry's comes out against Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone (rBGH), based on concern about its adverse economic impact on family farming and public confidence in the wholesomeness of dairy products.

1990 Contented Cows Make the Best Ice Cream

Eight million Ben & Jerry's pints carry a "Support Farm Aid" message as part of the grassroots efforts of Farm Aid, a non-profit organization whose mission is to keep family farmers on their land.

1991 A Pint-Sized Legend is Born

Chocolate Chip Cookie Dough is released in pints after years of research and development. The flavor rockets to the top of the most-popular-in-pints list. Today it still reigns among our all-time flavor hits. (The first-ever batch of the flavor was created in Ben & Jerry’s Burlington scoop shop in 1984, the result of an anonymous note scribbled on the shop's suggestion board).

1992 Take a Stand for Children

Ben & Jerry's joins in a cooperative campaign with the national non-profit, Children's Defense Fund; the campaign goal is to bring children's basic needs to the top of the national agenda. Over 70,000 postcards are sent to Congress concerning kids and other national issues.

1993 "The 90's are the 60's Standing on Your Head"

Wavy Gravy leads the pack of new flavors. It's named after the famous 1960's Woodstock Festival personality who is today a one-man non-profit helping kids.

1994 Greetings, Your Majesty

Pints of Ben & Jerry's ice cream begin to appear in the United Kingdom.

1995 www.benjerry.com

Hundreds of thousands of cyber-surfers visit the Ben & Jerry's World Wide Web site for virtual licks & voluminous laughs.

1996 No Fat, No Lactose, No Cholesterol

Ben & Jerry's introduces Sorbets made with pure spring water & the best fruits & flavorings. Doonesberry® Sorbet is named after the popular "Doonesbury®" comic strip character. It has since been sent to the Flavor Graveyard, but other sorbets live on in Scoop Shops.

1997 Phish Food For People

The great music & renowned concert tours of the Vermont-based musical group, Phish®, inspire Phish Food® ice cream.

1998 Happy Birthday with a Whole New Look

Some folks thought our packages were hard to read (& the flavors hard to resist), so after 20 years we dressed up our pints with a fresh new look!

1999 The Flying Friesian

In the U.K., Ben & Jerry’s launches the Flying Friesian, a raucous tour bus retrofitted for fun, with a focus on fundraising for U.K. kids-in-need network, Childline.

2010 Fair Trade Commitment

Ben & Jerry's makes a significant commitment to source Fairtrade ingredients and to support the global Fairtrade movement. We’re in the process of converting our ingredients to Fairtrade globally where we feel we can have the greatest impact on improving the lives of farmers, strengthening their communities and protecting the environment.

2011 Occupy!

When protestors in New York City and other places take to the streets under the Occupy Wall Street banner in the fall of 2011 to rally against increasing economic inequality in the United States, high unemployment, mortgage fraud, and too much corporate influence in American politics, Ben & Jerry’s Board of Directors issues a direct statement of solidarity, and we show up in Zucotti Park on several occasions to scoop ice cream for Occupiers.

2012 It's Greekin' Good!

Ben & Jerry’s gets creative with real Greek yogurt, introducing an epic selection of Greek Frozen Yogurt flavors that are uniquely creamy, boldly loaded with chunks and swirls, and really Greekin' good!

2013 GMO? Thanks, but No.

As the campaign to label food products made with GMO ingredients moves across the states, including Vermont, Ben & Jerry's is proud to stand with the growing consumer movement for transparency and the right to know what’s in our food supply by supporting mandatory GMO labeling legislation. In 2013, we also commit to transitioning all of our ingredients to be fully sourced non-GMO.

2014 Fans Make Non-Dairy Demands!

Our fans have spoken and want a Non-Dairy option, they even went as far as starting a Change.org petition.

2015 Another Flavor for Fallon...The Tonight Dough!

The concoction is caramel and chocolate ice creams with chocolate cookie swirls & gobs of chocolate chip cookie dough & peanut butter cookie dough. If the flavor becomes half as popular as the unflappable Fallon, who was dubbed “entertainer of the year,” it may give Ben & Jerry’s other classic combinations a run for their money.

2016 You Dared Us to Go Dairyless - and We Did!

Our Non-Dairy flavor creations are made with almond milk, 100% Certified Vegan, and boldly loaded with chunks and swirls. You’ll get Ben & Jerry’s euphoria in every bite. These flavors deliver everything… but the cow. The first Non-Dairy flavors in our line up were: Chocolate Fudge Brownie, Chunky Monkey, Coffee Caramel Fudge and P.B. & Cookies.

2017 IT'S BEN & JERRY'S, ANY WAY YOU SLICE IT

Pint Slices, inspired by the very best part of the pint, give fans a way to enjoy euphoric flavors, chunks and swirls in a round single serving that’s enrobed in a decadent chocolatey coating. It’s a to-go order of ice cream goodness that’s easy to take on the road, and hard to resist.

2018 Together, Pecan Resist!

Alongside all those nutty chunks, this pint packs a powerful message under its lid. Together, we can build a more just and equitable tomrrow.

2019 Justice ReMix'd

Ben & Jerry's flavor & action campaign supporting reforms that invest in people instead of prisons to deliver justice for all, instead of just for some.