Arsenal travel to unfamiliar surroundings as they head to Sweden to face Ostersunds in the Europa League.

With that, manager Arsene Wenger will face a new counterpart during his long and storied career at north London, when he takes on Englishman Graham Potter.

Ostersunds FK was founded in 1996 – 30 days after Arsene Wenger took charge of the Gunners – and Potter took control of the Swedish club in 2010.

It has been an incredible rise for the club, as it was only eight years’ ago they found themselves relegated to the Swedish fourth tier with average gates of 500 people.

The club’s chairman Daniel Kindberg almost walked away and the players themselves too would have followed suit, if Kindberg decided to leave the club he adores.

Kindberg then decided to stay on and the club’s fortunes were about to change when he made a phone-call to Graeme Jones, who was the assistant to Roberto Martinez at Swansea, Wigan, Everton and now Belgium, about recommending a new coach to him.

You can guess who that recommendation was.

Speaking to the BBC, Kindberg said that Graeme Jones and Roberto Martinez were spot on regarding Potter’s managerial appointment and since then, the club have enjoyed a meteoric rise.

Fast forward to July last year and Ostersunds defeated Turkish giants Galatasaray in the Europa League second qualifying stage.

Galatasaray were the highest ranked team in qualifying, and the partisan crowd even applauded the Swedish club off the pitch, commending their heroic efforts.

Ostersunds are now ready to play against the former Premier League and reigning FA Cup champions, Arsenal, and it has been an incredible journey for Potter.

Who is Graham Potter and what was his playing career like?

Potter, 42, is a former footballer who plied his trade at full-back.

In Potter’s 13-year playing career, he made 307 appearances in the Football League and also played in the Premier League for Southampton.

His playing career includes clubs such as Birmingham, Stoke, and West Brom and he had loan spells at Northampton Town and Reading.

At international level, he was capped once for England under-21s.

Potter decided to call time on his playing career at the age of 30 and did his coaching badges and interestingly did a teaching qualification that ended up with a job at the University of Hull as a football development manager and as assistant coach for the England Universities Squad.

It was an unconventional route into football management that Potter will be forever thankful for.

Speaking to the BBC, he said during his five-year period at Hull, he would make mistakes, develop, learn and work with the people at the university and coach the students.

He then took over at Ostersund in 2010 after receiving a phone call from Jones and meeting the chairman.

It was big decision for him and his young family to uproot from their comfortable surroundings in England to Sweden.

He said: ‘My wife had built up a business for 10 years and we’d just had our first child. So in that way it was a big move, it was her leaving her life. It’s not as if we were coming to Monte Carlo or a big football place – it was the fourth tier of Swedish football. It was a gamble.’

Potter successfully guided the club to the upper tier of Swedish football for the first time in 2015 following two successful promotions.

On 13 April 2017 he also won his first title as a manager when Ostersund won the Swedish Cup.

It’s been some journey for Potter… so far.

MORE : Manchester United fans devise plan to answer Jose Mourinho’s criticism