Åre and the charming town of Östersund are two gems in Jämtland county serving up a multifaceted offer of experiences. Åre is Sweden’s largest and most popular ski resort and many descend on the region for alpine skiing and cross-country skiing or the chance to see the Northern Lights. It has served as a rest stop for pilgrims on their way to Trondheim since the middle ages, and in the 19th century it established itself as a health resort – its clean mountain air and soul-soothing scenery giving relief to those living with lung conditions.

Östersund, formerly a military city, is the regional capital of Jämtland. It has a distinct cultural heritage, not least in terms of food. The use of local produce and preservation of traditional culinary methods saw Östersund enter the ranks of UNESCO City of Gastronomy over a decade ago – a title it still holds and carefully maintains.

Mountain activities aplenty

A winter holiday hotspot attracting snow sports enthusiasts from Sweden and beyond, Åre offers every imaginable mountain activity. Aside from alpine skiing and cross-country skiing for all ages and difficulty levels, you can take in the stunning scenery by setting off on snowshoe hikes, ice climbing and ski touring excursions, snowmobile tours and more. Outdoor activity company Explore Åre, among others, offers a wide range of experiences year-round.

Åre is a firm favourite among downhill mountain biking enthusiasts. Åre Bike Park allows you to mountain bike from a height of 853 metres all the way to the foot of the mountain, choosing from a range of trails. The hilly terrain is also ideal for hiking and trail running. There’s a hiking trail for everyone, with dizzying views at every turn.

There are plenty of winter activities in and around Östersund. Some 89 kilometres of cross country skiing tracks snake around the city – and you’ll find another couple of hundred kilometres a 20-minute drive away. Add to that the 20 kilometres of well-maintained ice-skating tracks running across a frozen Lake Storsjön – Sweden’s fifth largest lake – allowing for some spectacular long-distance excursions.

Fishing is a popular year-round activity. Try ice-fishing on Storsjön – the area around Öneberget is a good spot – for perch, whitefish, brown trout and grayling. In Åre, guides can take you across a frozen lake to catch trout and arctic char.

Summertime, Lake Storsjön transforms into a boating paradise, offering peaceful kayaking adventures or SUP trips in the waters near central Östersund’s Badhusparken (SUPs can be rented at Surfbukten on Frösön, a short walk across the footbridge from Badhusparken).

Discover the cultural heritage of Åre and Östersund

Travelling around Jämtland county to discover its many well-preserved homesteads and historic churches is a joy. Jamtli Museum, situated in central Östersund, is one of the region’s key cultural establishments and major attractions. Don’t miss the Överhogdal tapestries, parts of which date back to 800 AD, or the atmospheric Christmas market. Also visit the nearby Nationalmuseum Jamtli, with its art collections from Nationalmuseum in Stockholm. The open-air museum Historyland, which is open in summertime, will immerse you in authentic environments including 18th century homesteads and 1970s villas, replete with role-playing actors.

Fröå Gruva mining village is a year-round historic highlight located east of Åreskutan mountain. Surrounded by hiking paths – also suitable for cross country skiing – this fascinating environment stretches across idyllic pastures and can be discovered as part of a guided tour or on your own.

Jämtland is part of Sápmi, home of Sweden’s indigenous people, the Sami. Sami park Lopme Laante, open in summertime and located in Funäsdalen, allows you to learn about this distinctive culture’s past and present via storytelling, educational activities, food and traditional crafts. Reindeer herding is a chief Sami industry, and you’ll get to spend time with these beautiful animals as part of the experience.

Jämtland on a plate

Jämtland’s lakes, mountains, meadows and forests provide plenty of healthy ingredients. Using foraged delicacies, or those offered by the region’s many small-scale farmers and food producers, is the order of the day here – and one of the reasons why Östersund is a UNESCO City of Gastronomy.

Head to Jazzköket, a cosy Östersund restaurant, to sample the best Jämtland has to offer by way of tasting menus composed of meat, fish and greens – or, if you prefer, exclusively vegetarian or vegan. Live music is also on the menu, with local and international bands gracing the stage. Lunch is served at next-door sister eatery, Jazzköket Saluhall, which doubles as a food market.

2inspire-Ecocaféet is another centrally located Östersund spot, catering for most dietary requirements with its offer of organic lunch dishes, snacks and sweet treats. To drink, you’ll have a vast selection of organic tea and coffee to choose from.

Over in Åre, there are also many producers of locally sourced food and drinks. Rustic mountain lodge Buustamons Fjällgård mostly harvests its ingredients within the region, while recipes take inspiration from the culinary culture of Åre and other mountain destinations.

Åre Kafferosteri, located in the centre of town, serves speciality coffee, sourced ethically and roasted on-site.

Jämtland is studded with microbreweries. Aside from the well-established Jämtlands Bryggeri – offering both classic and more progressive brews – there are newer additions such as Åre Bryggcompagni and Jemtehed & Brande to discover.