Read Your Way Around the World is a series exploring the globe through books.

Few challenges are as complex in Madrid as finding a cat. Not the animal, but a gato — someone who was born in Madrid, whose parents and grandparents were born in Madrid. Nobody in Madrid was born here: You’ll seldom be asked where you are from, because the assumption is that you’re from somewhere else, although suspicion — and prejudice — can come up when you have a certain accent or skin color.

I was not born in Madrid, but I am from Madrid. When I think of the books that have been written about the city, the thread that unites them has to do with the gaze — and the experience — of those who come from elsewhere to forge their identity here: that feeling of looking for a place of one’s own in a city that is difficult, often hostile, and that refuses to be reduced to an ideal.

But Madrid, of course. The city of the corrales de comedias, open-air theaters where the medium was reinvented during our Golden Age. The city in whose cafes Leandro Fernández de Moratín, Ramón Gómez de la Serna and Gloria Fuertes all talked about literature — unfortunately not at the same time, though what a discussion that would have been! The city of the Generation of 1927, where Federico García Lorca, Lucía Sánchez Saornil and Vicente Aleixandre began their careers. The city that was also Rubén Darío’s, Gabriela Mistral’s and Juan Carlos Onetti’s, no matter that they hailed from another continent. The city where Carmen Laforet, who was born in Barcelona, and Ángela Figuera Aymerich, from Bilbao, wrote. “The Capital of the World,” as Ernest Hemingway called it in his short story, which takes us back to the months before the Spanish Civil War.

What should I read before I pack my bags?

No one has portrayed Madrid with greater intensity than Benito Pérez Galdós. Part of his 46-volume, Balzacian series “National Episodes” takes place here; from it, I’d choose “Fortunata and Jacinta,” a choral novel that discusses the way the city constructs its social classes, and vice versa. Camilo José Cela’s “The Hive” is also a good choice, teeming with hundreds of characters who cross paths in the Madrid of the early years of Francisco Franco’s dictatorship, for which the author worked as a censor. To get to know those who live in Madrid, you must also read “Living’s the Strange Thing,” a gorgeous novel by Carmen Martín Gaite about daily life in the city.

What books can take me behind closed doors or show me other facets of the city?

I have a weakness for the play “Bohemian Lights,” by Ramón María del Valle-Inclán. In it, we spend almost 24 hours with the poet Max Estrella, reflecting on the decadence of Spanish society in the 1920s (in general, reflecting on the decadence of Spanish society in any era is one of Madrilenians’ obsessions). The play mentions many places that still exist: the chocolate shop in San Ginés, the mirror-lined Callejón del Gato (Cat Alley). I would also recommend “The Maravillas District,” an autobiographical novel by Rosa Chacel that takes place in the streets of a Malasaña very different from the gentrified district beloved by students (and tourists) today. To continue getting to know a Madrid far removed from postcards, not only socially but also geographically, you should read “A Working Woman,” by Elvira Navarro. It is a reflection on the precarity of labor, especially in the field of culture: The protagonist works as a freelancer in the publishing industry, and barely survives in the neighborhood of Aluche.

What writer is everyone talking about? And which books are they reading?

Almudena Grandes. Her work, which includes novels, short stories and articles, is a long love letter to Madrid, and she died in November 2021; the photos of her funeral are moving, with Republican flags mingling with her books in the hands of thousands of readers. She wrote eloquently about Spain’s recent past — the Second Republic, the Civil War and the years of dictatorship that followed.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.