For the well-versed traveler, Madrid conjures a certain image: a long table overflowing with exquisite tapas, graceful flamenco in a moody club, and a long tardeo spent sipping Spanish vermouth. Beyond the obvious appeal, Madrid has a multifaceted flair that is impossible to replicate, defined by exquisite cuisine, breathtaking art, and a culture entrenched in tradition. Spain’s capital city and its surrounding towns are constantly buzzing, inviting visitors from near and far to discover all that makes it so easy to love.

To get a behind-the-scenes look at all the magic that is Madrid, we sent three of our favorite travel tastemakers to explore its bustling barrios and towns. Though each had different interests and areas of expertise—Culture, Art, and Gastronomy—they all left with a deep appreciation for the fascinating, friendly city. From sampling a young Spanish wine straight from the barrel to basking in the wonder of the Golden Triangle of Art to tasting churros and chocolate at a centuries-old cafe, here are three curated travel itineraries that prove Madrid is the heart and soul of Spain.

Itinerary: Culture

Lithuanian-born Karolina Valeikaite is no stranger to a life of travel. After studying photography in London, she managed to combine two of her greatest passions—travel and photography—into a dream career that takes her all over the world. Karoline and her partner traverse the globe for outsideboxx, snapping glamorous photos and capturing content on behalf of some of the most sought-after hotel and travel brands. Despite being a professional travel photographer, Karolina hadn’t spent much time in Madrid before. “This time, I wanted to really get to know the city,” Karolina said. Here’s how she did it.

Royal Palace of Madrid

Karolina’s first stop was the Royal Palace of Madrid. The iconic landmark and official home of the Spanish royal family is larger than both Buckingham Palace and Versailles, boasting more than 3,418 rooms, 240 balconies, and 44 staircases. Between its opulent neoclassical architecture, an extensive collection of art, and a significant collection of weapons and armor worn by kings of Spain, the Royal Palace is much like the city of Madrid itself—diverse, vibrant, and inspiring. patrimonionacional.es/en.

The Royal Theatre

Less than a five-minute walk from the Royal Palace is one of the most prestigious opera houses in all of Europe: Teatro Real, or the Royal Theatre. The stunning architectural marvel has been drawing visitors from around the world since the reign of Queen Isabel. Today, art lovers flock to the theater for its lavish, art-filled halls, but the main draw is the curated selection of world-class performances—from baroque opera to ballet. “Touring the Royal Theatre was one of the highlights of my trip,” said Karolina. “I didn’t expect how much work goes on behind the scenes to put these productions together.” www.teatroreal.es/en.

Corral de la Morería

It wouldn’t be a proper visit to Madrid without experiencing the expressive art of flamenco, and the best place to do it is at the oldest tablao in Spain. “The energy of the performance is highly contagious, to the point where you feel like you’re moving along with the performers,” said Karolina. The famous flamenco club has two dining options—an exclusive gastronomic experience helmed by Michelin-starred chef David García, which seats only four tables and works as a pre-show dinner, or the larger Tablao Restaurant, which is situated around the stage. corraldelamoreria.com/en.

Chocolatería San Ginés

Tucked in an alleyway next to the bustling Puerta del Sol square is one of Madrid’s most beloved cafes, Chocolatería San Ginés. An order of churros and chocolate is what you come here for; light, crispy churros served alongside a cup of warm, thick dipping chocolate. “The place was always buzzing,” said Karolina, “daytime or evening, the long queues didn’t stop people from getting a sweet treat.” The bustling cafe is a catch-all for any occasion, be it a slow, indulgent breakfast or a late-night treat. chocolateriasangines.com.

Cocol

Located in the stylish La Latina neighborhood, Cocol is a boutique that proves why shopping locally is always a good idea. Every item, from esparto baskets to heirloom ceramics bears the name of an independent Spanish artist, curated by the shop’s owner, Pepa Entrena. “Pepa is a dedicated collector who treasures pieces from all of her sources,” said Karolina, who was especially charmed by the collection of ceramics in the shop. “Pepa specifically hunts for ceramics painted using a technique that has vanished from formal teaching but continues to be handed down through generations,” she said. cocolmadrid.es/en.

Antigua Casa Crespo

“I find it satisfying to collect travel souvenirs that I can incorporate into my daily life, especially in the form of accessories I can wear,” said Karolina. Antigua Casa Crespo, then, was Karolina’s ideal shopping destination. The family-owned store has been making espadrilles for the last 150 years, making it the oldest purveyor of stylish shoes in Madrid. Each pair is handmade using traditional techniques, meaning no two pairs are the same. antiguacasacrespo.com/en.

Real Jardin Botánico de Madrid

When you want to take a break from the pace of the city, a visit to Madrid’s botanical garden is in order. “The atmosphere in Madrid is so full of life, but there are also lovely pockets of green space that provide a nice balance, like the botanical gardens,” said Karolina. The massive 20-acre park offers a vibrant respite from the bustle, known for its diverse plant life, stunning flowers, and elegant, sprawling pathways. Bring a book and relax amongst the greenery, or take a leisurely afternoon stroll. entradas.rjb.csic.es.

Itinerary: Art

Growing up in the tech scene of Silicon Valley, Selena Daphne Taylor never imagined she would one day become a travel photographer. “Anything in the creative field felt like a pipe dream,” she said. Being raised by a Greek mother and a Dutch father meant Selena spent a lot of time visiting family in Europe over the years. After falling in love with Amsterdam's easy lifestyle, she and her husband decided to relocate to the city. Selena's ethereal work is inspired by the nuances of color and light she encounters during her many travels. Needless to say, she was thrilled to explore Madrid's dreamy art scene. Here's how she did it.

Galería Marlborough

The unknowing traveler might stroll right past Galería Marlborough without noticing it—but once you step inside, you’ll be transported. “The gallery curation is intentional and really has a less-is-more approach,” said Selena, “so you’re able to truly appreciate the work of the local artists on display.” The chic gallery hosts a rotating collection of modern and contemporary works. The space itself was designed by New York architect Richard Gluckman, the mastermind behind iconic museum spaces like Dia Beacon. The gallery features work from more than 20 artists, including an extensive collection of sculptures. galeriamarlborough.com.

Royal Palace of Aranjuez

Part of the larger Aranjuez cultural landscape, the spring residence of the Spanish royal family is a quick 45 minute train ride from Madrid proper. Perfect for an afternoon trip, this UNESCO World Heritage Site was established in the 16th-century as a royal hunting lodge. The ornate palace consists of beautifully preserved royal rooms surrounded by graceful gardens. “The spaces inside are crafted with the most intricate details, from floor to ceiling,” said Selena, “but my favorite part was exploring the grounds, especially along the river. The warm hues glow against the blue water. It’s serene.” patrimonionacional.es/en.

Museo del Romanticismo

Dedicated to the period of history that touched so many young artists and intellectuals, Museo del Romanticismo paints a picture of everyday life in Madrid in the 19th century. Aside from traditional works of art, the museum houses everything from porcelain dolls to the pistol Spanish satirist Mariano José de Larra used to commit suicide. The museum also displays works by contemporary artists. “I loved the stark contrast in style of the featured artist, Violet,” said Selena. “She snapped photos of women in traditional Victorian garments rebelling against what was ‘acceptable’ female behavior during that time—women on bikes in their traditional garments, in striking or commanding poses, and smoking.” culturaydeporte.gob.es/mromanticismo.

Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum

Strolling along the tree-lined Paseo del Prado leads you to Madrid’s Golden Triangle of Art, said to be the highest concentration of beauty in the world—Museo del Prado, Museo Reina Sofia, and the Thyssen-Bornemisza. The three-floor museum is located in a beautiful neoclassical palace, covering art from the 17th-century all the way to the 20th-century. The collection includes paintings from celebrated artists like Van Gogh, Kirchner, Hopper, Gauguin, Rubens, and Frans Hals. museothyssen.org/en/thyssenmultimedia

Museo Reina Sofia

Of all the museums and galleries Selena visited, the Museo Reina Sofia was her favorite. “The space itself is spectacular. You enter through a glass elevator with views of the square, and once inside you wander through the arched hallways and can pop in and out of different exhibits,” said Selena. Designated as Spain's national museum of 20th-century art, it is home to a world-renowned collection of modern and contemporary Spanish works. “I loved the exhibit showcasing historic city planning with old maps and photographs, but I also enjoyed the sculptures and Picasso works,” said Selena. museoreinasofia.es/en.

Architecture in Madrid

One of the best parts about a visit to Madrid is marveling at the incredible architecture, from the Plaza Mayor to Barrio de La Latina. As a photographer inspired by color, Selena was drawn to the pastel-toned facades and wrought iron balconies. “I stumbled on a colorful brick-patterned building near the Plaza de las Salesas that was unlike anything else in the city. Puerta del Sol has a light pink building that strikes me as straight out of a Wes Anderson movie. I walked past an old pharmacy with the most intricate green and yellow hand-painted tiles. Every single one of these feels like it could belong in a different city, yet they somehow work together,” said Selena. esmadrid.com.

Itinerary: Gastronomy

Eleonore Toulin has lived many lives, from gracing the runways of Paris Fashion Week to working under a renowned photographer to studying at Alain Ducasse’s culinary school. Today, the Parisian-born private chef is living out her childhood dreams in Los Angeles. Her workweek varies based on the projects at hand—it can include anything from designing menus and sourcing ingredients for a luxe private lunch on a quaint French island to recipe testing at home over a glass of wine. Needless to say, Eleonore is an expert when it comes to food and wine, so when she had the opportunity to discover Madrid’s celebrated culinary scene for the first time, her expectations were high. The city did not disappoint.

Valquejigoso Vineyards

A quick 30 minute drive transports you from the city to Valquejigoso, a sprawling vineyard immersed in nature. Being quite proud of the viniculture in her native country of France, Eleanor was delighted to discover the pristine winemaking techniques practiced in Madrid. The vineyard’s owner, Felix Colomo, has become an expert in the very specific terroir on which the vineyard sits. “He has all the fancy equipment you see in big wineries, and yet still manages to keep a highly personal approach to the process,” said Eleanor. While touring the grounds she had a chance to inspect the vines, see the wild boars and deer roam, and taste the vineyard’s famous V2 Bordeaux blend straight from the barrel. valquejigoso.com/en.

RavioXO

You won’t find another restaurant quite like RavioXO, the brainchild of four-Michelin-starred chef Dabiz Muñoz. “The chef is a genius and I don’t ever use that word,” Eleonore said. The cuisine is informal and fully centered around the world of pasta, but not in the way you might expect. Doughs with fillings and expertly crafted sauces come together beautifully in dishes like Muñoz’s Hong Kong interpretation of cocido, with ropa vieja, fried chickpeas, acorn-fed ham broth, and black garlic aioli. “The food is an incredible fusion of cultures and techniques. The hangover pasta was 10 out of 10,” said Eleonore. Be sure to eat a light lunch before coming here for dinner, because you’ll want to order everything. ravioxo.com/en.

Angelita

Angelita is many things at once—a cozy, laid-back restaurant servicing contemporary Spanish cuisine, a wine bar, and a haven for cocktail connoisseurs. “It’s one of the most sophisticated bar programs I’ve seen in my life,” Eleanor said. “They basically don’t even need to use ice or shakers anymore because all their drinks are perfectly chilled and diluted by hand.” From the cocktail menu to the food, the ingredients have an intense local focus. “We had a life-changing charcuterie that was like Iberico ham except with beef from a nearby farm,” Eleanor said. “If I lived in Madrid, this would be my weekly haunt.” madrid-angelita.es/en.

Bodegas el Mano

It wouldn’t be a proper trip to Spain without feasting on tapas, the delicious small bites the country has become famous for. Though practically every restaurant in Madrid will have a menu section dedicated to tapas, no one does it quite like Bodegas el Mano—bring a few friends, order one of everything, and don’t skimp on the classics. “If I had to choose a few favorite items, it would be either the tortilla, the croquettes, or the artichoke with jamon,” Eleanor said. Every item pairs well with the curated selection of Spanish wines, and the San Sebastian-style burnt cheesecake dessert should never be skipped. “I normally don’t like cheesecake but I ate it all which should tell you everything you need to know,” said Eleanor. bodegaselmano.com.

El Paraguas

For those evenings when you want to get dressed up and enjoy an intimate meal in a beautiful setting, El Paraguas is the place. Simplicity and elegance reign supreme, with white tablecloth service and traditional Spanish dishes done right. The restaurant is set on a charming street and patrons can either sit inside or enjoy their meal on the terrace under a canopy of trees. “It was dreamy,” said Eleanor. Dinner should start with a split of rosé champagne or Spanish wine, followed by some amuse bouche. “We tried oysters, green salad, and jamon—always jamon,” said Eleanor. “Our waiter told us we had to try the truffle and morels, which were creamy & fragrant. Just sublime.” elparaguas.com/en.

Marcera Teller Bar

For a taste of Madrid’s cool, hipster counterculture, Marcera Teller Bar is where to go. Focusing on the traditional maceration technique—distilling unique ingredients into alcohol to transform its flavor into something entirely new—the bar is centered around funky, distinct spirits. “All their alcohol is homemade, and they have surprising combinations, like tequila flavored with rosemary, thyme, and orange peel,” said Eleanor. Spirits can be sipped on the rocks or mixed into a delicious cocktail. Aside from the bar, there is also a workshop where patrons can create their own spirit to bring home. maceradrinks.com/en.