Madrid is a city of art. From the stunning museums and grandiose architecture to its world renowned poets, writers and painters. There’s so much to see in this city that some of its most unique and beloved masterpieces sometimes go unnoticed. We’re talking about the statues that adorn the city’s streets and that have become a beloved and somewhat curious symbol of Madrid. We’ve made a list of some of the most popular and peculiar ones so you don’t miss them. Make sure to keep an eye out for them as you walk the sunny streets!

La Abuela Rockera (C. Peña Gorbea 22)

Literally "The Rocker Grandma," this is one of Madrid’s quirkiest statues. It pays tribute to Ángeles Rodríguez Hidalgo, a huge Rock & Roll and Heavy Metal fan. Born in Argentina and raised in Seville, Ángeles became an icon in Madrid’s rock scene. At the age of 80 she became a radio personality and columnist in some of the scene’s most popular shows and magazines. She would party with the radio crew after the transmissions and would be seen backstage at many of the rowdiest shows. She even made it to the album covers of some of the city’s biggest bands. After her death in 1993, a concert was organised to raise funds for a statue in her honour. You can now find her statue standing tall, rebellious and proud, leather jacket and devil horns included. May you Rock in Peace, Ángeles!

El Barrendero (Plaza Jacinto Benavente)

This statue pays tribute to some of Madrid’s most overlooked and hardest workers: street sweepers. The hard working bronze man used to be seen sweeping a pack of Celtas Cortos cigarettes, but the pack has long disappeared, likely in the hands of the same type of people who would litter the streets. El Barrendero is modeled after Jesús Moreno, Madrid’s most veteran sweeper at the time, who had been in service for 48 years in 2001 at the time the statue was created. It is a beautiful and beloved tribute to some of the city’s unsung heroes.

Tras Julia (C. del Pez, 42)

No one really knows for certain who Julia was or if she was even real, but her legend lives strong in the streets of Madrid nonetheless. Folklore says that Julia represents a female student who dressed up as a man to attend university at a time when women were not allowed to enroll. Some believe her real-life counterpart was Concepción Arenal, a lawyer, writer and human rights activist who is known to have dressed up as a man in order to study law in 1840. Others believe she represents those who wanted to attend university but couldn’t and some believe she represents all girls who enrolled at universities when they were first allowed. Truth be told, Julia represents the rebellious and determined spirit of Madrid’s female students.

El Vecino Curioso (C. de la Almudena, 1)

This statue, whose name translates to “The Curious Neighbour,” was erected in 1999 as part of the conservation process of the ruins of the Almudena Church. The anonymous old man stands leaning on a rail, forever overlooking the dilapidated church. There’s no iconic model or deep meaning behind him, perhaps it's just a tribute to Madrid’s retired chaps who spend their afternoons people watching. His back, and, more specifically, his buttocks shine from the caresses of passersby. Some believe it brings luck, others do it out of custom and others… Well, you can draw your own conclusions.

Accidente Aéreo - Ángel Estrellado (C. Milaneses, 3)

This statue is officially called Air Crash, but it’s more popularly known as Crashed Angel. When it was first erected on top of a building, just a stone’s throw from Plaza Mayor, controversy arose regarding the meaning behind it. Some thought it was Lucifer falling from heaven–since Madrid is already infamous for hosting one of the only public statues of the Devil. Others thought it might be Icarus, having fallen after getting too close to the sun. The mystery was solved when the sculptor himself, Miguel Ángel Ruiz Beato, revealed the backstory in an interview with El País: “A winged man goes for a spin and when he returns, flying calmly on his back, while sunbathing, he doesn’t realise that in the meadow, where he usually lands, a whole city has already been built. The result is this accident.”

These are just a few of Madrid’s curious and unique statues. They have become precious residents of the city in their own right. For those who aren’t aware, they’re easy to miss, among the museums, classic architecture and buzzing tapas bars. Now that you know, keep an eye open and see how many you can spot!