Vivica A. Fox

Actress, Producer, Director, Philanthropist

Hollywood screen gem, Vivica A. Fox, has triumphantly built an international brand that stands on the strength that women can do anything. With an extensive body of work that encompasses unforgettable television, stage and film credits, Fox is an inspiration as a Hollywood actress, generous philanthropist and accomplished businesswoman.

Vivica A. Fox is best known as an on-screen actress (Independence Day, Kill Bill, Soul Food, Two Can Play That Game) and entertainer but she’s steadily making a name for herself as producer & director. And the year of 2023 started off great with a win in California Women’s Film Festival as best lead actress for Twisted Vines (Twisted Vines 2022)! Vivica also continues a partnership with CarShield as their fabulous spokeswoman while gracing us with pop culture cameo in R&B singer SZA’s #1 hit single “Kill Bill”. But let this year be known for Fox’s first directorial project with BETplus on the film “First Lady of BMF: Tonesa Welch Story” released on Oct 5th. Stay tuned for more!

​Earlier in 2022, Fox continued with producing and starring in the So Wrong Franchise with a new Lifetime mini-series called “The Wrong Family” and most recent series “Keeping Up With The Joneses”. This year also saw a hilarious cameo on ABC’s hit show “Black-ish” as herself. 22′ holidays saw Vivica star in A New Diva’s Christmas Carol executive produced by Idris Elba.

​In 2021, she had a fun directorial debut on BET HER “Through Her Eyes”. On Fox Soul TV, she shines bright as co-host on “Cocktails with Queens” while on the same platform, hosts her own show, “The Screening Room” where she showcases African-American filmmakers.

​She enjoyed a great run for the podcast show “Hustling With Vivica A. Fox”, which was made possible by Dr. Phil’s Stage 29 Productions. This is where she shares conversations about the industry and the hustle spirit with special guests from all walks of life such as: Jeremy Meeks (Actor), Mekia Cox (Actress) and Mark Randolph (Tech Entrepreneur).

Extensive Background

​Where you can be entertained, Fox has entertained! She entered the scene as a fresh-faced model to our fave’s music videos (Tupac, Climaxxx, Michael Jackson, Jaheim, Isley Brothers), worked on ground-breaking soap opera shows (Days Of Our Lives, Generations, Y&R), guest-starred in your favorite sitcoms (Fresh Prince, 90210) to co-starring inblockbuster films (Independence Day, Kill Bill, Ella Enchanted, Batman, Two Can Play That Game), cultural classics (Set It Off, Soul Food, Why Do Fools Fall In Love), reality shows (Celebrity Apprentice), hosting duties on talk shows (Face The Truth) and in record-breaking tv shows (Empire), not to mention theater work with Je’Caryous Johnson.

As a producer, Fox has worked with Academy Award® nominee Terrence Howard on “The Salon” which she also starred in and teamed with VH1 for “Glam God”. She continues to use her producing chops with a healthy batch of made-for-TV films through Lifetime and Ion TV (So Wrong Series, Husband For Christmas).

​​After past successful corporate collaborations with major brands (Cadillac, Google, Carshield), Vivica expanded her brand into the beauty industry and launched her own hair company – The Vivica Fox Hair Collection. Offering a variety of options for women in high quality wigs and extensions, Vivica’s mission remains clear – to inspire women of all ages to live life to the fullest.

​Always giving back to the community, the starlet uses The Vivica Fox Hair Collection to make generous donations of free hair to women worldwide who have lost their own hair to cancer-related illnesses. Vivica A. Fox Hair is proud to be one of the sponsors for the LA Sparks from 2015-2021. She also continues her entrepreneurial hustle with celebrating ten amazing years with Vivica Fox Hair.

​​Among her many philanthropic endeavors, Fox speaks at several empowering events for women in business and the industry. She is also a proud member of the Zeta Phi Beta Sorority Inc. as they celebrated their Centennial earlier in 2021. Vivica’s empire continues to grow as this versatile Hollywood legend continues to inspire, indulge and entertain an international fan base. The hustle doesn’t stop!