Vivica A. Fox is more than ready for Kill Bill Vol. 3 although nothing official when it comes to a movie within the franchise is in the works.

“People are hungry. Quentin [Tarantino], let’s go!,” she said while attending the Variety Studio presented by Audible at Sundance.

Fox portrayed Vernita Green in Tarantino’s 2003 Kill Bill Vol. 1 and the 2004 sequel Kill Bill Vol. 2, which also stars Uma Thurman and Lucy Liu. The first movie stars Thurman as the Bride, who swears retribution on a team of assassins (Fox and Liu) after they try to kill her.

RELATED: Vivica A. Fox Wants Zendaya To Play Her Daughter In Next ‘Kill Bill’

While Fox's character doesn’t survive in the original Kill Bill she said that she would jump at the opportunity to participate in the third film, if it does ultimately happen.

According to Variety, Tarantino has mentioned the possibilities of a Kill Bill Vol. 3 and teased that it would focus on the daughter of Fox’s character as she sets out to avenge her mother’s death by killing Thurman’s the Bride.

RELATED: Vivica Fox On How Hollywood Has Changed For Black Actors And Content Creators

“I’ve been waiting,” she said. “They said it’s going to be my daughter growing up. I know he’ll figure out some kind of way…maybe I’ll be in a flashback. I’d love to work with Quentin again and I’d love to work with Uma again. It was a lot of training.”

Back in 2020, Fox shared that she would like Zendaya to play her daughter if Kill Bill Vol. 3 comes into fruition.

“How hot would that be? And that would probably greenlight this project. Because her and Uma are both very tall, and it would just be kick-butt, and I love her,” she said in an interview with NME.

“Hopefully now we can put that out, like ‘Tarantino, cast Zendaya!’" she added. "And spark his interest to put it on the fast track. Wouldn’t it be amazing?”

By clicking Subscribe, you confirm that you have read and agree to our Terms of Use and acknowledge our Privacy Policy. You also agree to receive marketing communications, updates, special offers (including partner offers) and other information from BET and the Paramount family of companies. You understand that you can unsubscribe at any time.