Everyday thousands of Ghanaians use the Ako Adjei interchange located between Ring Road Central and Independence Avenue with links towards the 37 Military Hospital and the Police Headquarters.

But who is this man and why has he been named after such a great edifice?

Dr. Ebenezer Ako Adjei, is a political figure, a lawyer and a founding member of the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC).

He was a member of the Big Six of Gold Coast politics who were instrumental in the struggle for Ghana’s independence from the British.

Now wait for the twist. Adjeikrom is not in Accra but in the deep cocoa forest of Akim. So how does a Ga man’s exploits earn him the right to a whole community in the Eastern Region?

Welcome to Adjeikrom Village, one of Ghana’s Tourist attraction centers. The community is located in the Fanteakwa District of the Eastern Region of Ghana, on the Oseam Begoro road, and it is about an hour drive from the capital of Ghana, Accra.

Adjeikrom has a spectacular landscape, soundered by the kwahu Range Mountains, with respect to weather condition the area has as moderate temperature all year round, which is very much ideal for visitors from all corners of the world, who would equally enjoy a gesture of hospitality from the indigenes at Adjeikrom village.

Adjeikrom is much of a farming community with a land size of about 1,800 acres, population of about 1,500 approximate, indigenes here are Ga’s and Krobo’s cultivating plantain, cocoyam, cassava and later on added cocoa to his farm.

As it turned out it was the cocoa farm which became the most successful. It so flourished that Adjeikrom soon became a cocoa buying point for the neighboring villages. In 1945 Mr. Adjei died at the age of 82.

A visit to the area reveals how cocoa as a crop has help to define the History and culture of the village.

Adjeikrom Experience

Business Day Hospitality team, on a visit to Adjeikrom met with Mr. Adjei Mensah popularly known as “Osam” the official tour guide for Adjeikrom Cocoa tour facility. “Adjeikrom cocoa farm is full with the finest highbred of cocoa beans.

This type of bred is the most precious one that most cocoa farmers would love to plant, which guarantee cocoa farmers with high quality yield yearly.

Any tourist or visitor to the cocoa farm comes with much joy and satsification by coming out being more schooled about the history behind Ghana’s Cocoa Industry. Visitors to Adjeikrom have the opportunity to tour the rural cocoa farms and learn how cocoa grown, maintained, harvested fermented and dried, before selling is.

Adjeikrom village offers something else apart from cocoa tourist facility

One of the big six who fought for the independence of Ghana Dr. Ebenezer Ako Adjei was born at Adjeikrom in 1916, history has it that Ako Adjei together with the rest of the big six had several of their secret meeting at Adjeikrom under the kola trees in order to plan their various strategies for Ghana’s Independence in 1956.

Close by the meeting ground is a stream christen “The Big Six Stream”. Till date the stream serve as a potable source of water for the people of Adjeikrom.

Tourist who visit the village pay a courtesy call to the Ako Adjei Family resident to learn more about his life. Visitors are taken on a guided tour within the community to socialized with the local people, learn about their traditions and to experiences typical rural lifestyle, they are entreated to folk long entertainment including cultural dance performance etc.

Food

In Adjeikrom cocoa tour village, when visitors come in as group or individuals arrangement is done for the preparation of food to the very taste of the visitors. However other times, some tourist prefer to get their food from the near bay restaurant “Linda Dor” which is close to Bunso junction, not far from Adjeikrom cocoa tour village.

Recreation facilities

The area offers mountain biking and hiking to the kwahu escapement. The mountain is called “Aponii” Mountain with the height of about 332 meters high, visitors mostly try to climb to experiences what is on the Aponii mountain top.

History had it that the first settler in the “Aponii” mountain curve with the name Samuel Adjei, who was the father of Dr. Ebenezer Ako Adjei.

Mountain top

Climbing to the edge of the mountain claves on foot is with a unique experience for first time visitors. As this experiences offers a mountain freshness and an area view of the entire Adjeikrom village with the surroundings communities. The area is home to butterflies, small antelopes, various rodents and a range of bird species. It is a variable tropical paradise that offers hiking, bird watching, mountain biking and walking opportunities. This natural environment provides a lovely backdrop to the rural communities.

There is more a tourist to the village can experience and enjoy.

Holiday revelers may find convince escape to this wonderful natural environment for breath, taken experiences and leave long lasting memories on their minds.

Facts Sheets

“Dr. Ebenezer Ako Adjei was born on the 17th June 1916, in the small village of Adjeikrom, which is located between Bosuso Railway Station and Begoro in the Benkum Division of the Akyem Abuakwa Traditional Area, in the Eastern Region of Ghana. The village was named after his father, Mr. Samuel Adjei, who was a farmer, and who founded the village.

His mother was Mrs. Johanna Okailey Adjei. Both parents hailed from La, (formerly Labadi), Accra Ghana.”

“.. Adjeikrom, a cocoa-growing community near Begoro in the Eastern Region which was established by the late Samuel Adjei, the father of Mr Ako Adjei, a member of Ghana’s Big Six who fought for Ghana’s independence. ..

The village is named after its founder, Samuel Adjei, who bought 1,800 acres of land there and began cultivating plantain, cocoyam and cassava.”

Sheila Williams