- A member of the Big Six, Dr. Ebenezer Ako- Adjei, lost his life on January 14, 2002, at the Korle Bu Teaching Hospital.

- Dr. Ebenezer Ako-Adjei, in his lifetime, was a lawyer, journalist, and politician who worked in various offices in government

- He was a member of both the Convention People's Party and the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC).

Our Manifesto: This is what YEN.com.gh believes in

Dr. Ebenezer Ako-Adjei, one of the members of the Big Six, died on January 14, 2002, at the Korle Bu Teaching Hospital.

Information available shows that he was born on June 17, 1916, and played a key role in the attainment of Ghana’s independence.

Dr. Ako-Adjei was a lawyer, journalist, and politician who served in several important roles in Cabinet such as minister for foreign affairs.

READ ALSO: American actress Lisa Raye crowned queen mother in Ghana (Photo)

He was the last of the Big Six to die and he lived through nine governments.

Per a report by Ghana Facts & History, he was a member of the Convention People’s Party (CPP) and also worked with the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC).

YEN.com.gh understands that he was alive during the governments of Nkrumah, General Ankrah & Afrifa, Busia, Acheampong, Akuffo, Rawlings, Limann and Kufour.

In other news, the Ghana Police Service (GPS) has revealed that some commercial drivers could take advantage of their passengers if care is not taken.

In a video that has since gone viral, a passenger is robbed of his money after he sought to assist a taxi driver.

The passenger, via a phone call, informed someone that he had gone to cash some money.

Soon after, the driver informs him that there is a problem with the car and there is the need to push it.

The passenger then alights, leaving his bag which contains money at the back seat of the car.

READ ALSO: Meet the Ghanaian woman who led the slave revolt in the West Indies in 1733

Your favourite news website, YEN.com.gh, has been nominated for online portal of the year by the National Communications Awards. Please click here to vote and help us win.

Star Gist: Rev. Dr. Charlotte Oduro Shares Thoughts on Sex for Grades and CSE | #Yencomgh

Do you have a hot story or scandal you would like us to publish on YEN.com.gh? Please contact us on Facebook or Instagram now!

Source: YEN.com.gh