MY LIFE IN RUINS — ★1/2 — Nia Vardalos, Richard Dreyfuss, Alexis Georgoulis; rated PG-13 (vulgarity, profanity, slurs, brief sex, nude art, violence, brief drugs); in general release

"My Life in Ruins" was supposed to be Nia Vardalos' long-awaited return to the big screen — after she scored a sleeper hit with the charming "My Big Fat Greek Wedding" (2002) and then tanked with the noxious, gender-bending farce "Connie and Carla" (2004).

As painfully unfunny as this particular film is, though, she'll be lucky if people aren't referring to the movie as "My Career in Ruins" in the years to come.

This supposed comedy is full of big, fat Greek stereotypes, crude sexual references and jokes, and some even-more-questionable humor.

Worse, Vardalos mugs shamelessly throughout the movie and comes across as being smug and self-superior. It's almost like she's trying to make us dislike her.

She stars as Georgia, an American expert on ancient civilizations who finds herself working as a tour guide in Greece.

Georgia is trying to show tourists such sites as the Acropolis. Most of them would rather buy overpriced trinkets and visit the beaches.

So, it's no wonder that she's planning to quit soon. Her current tour group includes a pair of ugly Americans (Rachel Dratch and Harland Williams), a wisecracking widower (Richard Dreyfuss) and the mostly silent driver, Poupi (Alexis Georgoulis), who turns out to be a sensitive musician type.

Some talented people worked on this film. Screenwriter Mike Reiss has written for TV's "The Simpsons," while director Donald Petrie is a veteran with at least a couple of hits to his credit ("Grumpy Old Men" and "Miss Congeniality").

That makes this mess even more inexcusable.

In fact, the only reason to see the film is the magnificent Grecian settings. It's just a shame the filmmakers didn't jettison the story and turn this into a travelogue.

"My Life in Ruins" is rated PG-13 and features crude humor involving sexual and other bodily functions, other sexual references (slang and suggestive talk), occasional strong profanity, derogatory language and slurs (based on ethnic heritage and nationality), a brief sex scene and other sexual contact (mostly implied), glimpses of nude paintings and statues, some brief violence (a scuffle and some vehicular mayhem), and brief drug content (references to male enhancement drugs, as well as some intravenous injections). Running time: 96 minutes.