Lorenzo “Larry” Archibeque Larrañaga, age 80, loving husband, father, grandfather, brother, uncle and friend, passed away surrounded by his loving family Tuesday, October 9, 2018.

Lorenzo was born at his home at Red Hills Ranch, near Encino, NM. He was known for being the rock of his family, a proud veteran of the United States Army, and a tireless public servant who fought for a better New Mexico. He was very proud of his large, faithful and loving family and will be remembered for his honesty, integrity, generosity and willingness to serve others.

He is survived by his wife, Charletta; his son, Alan and wife Camellia; his daughter, Pam and husband John; his grandchildren, Melanie Gorsuch and husband Chance, Lindsey Larrañaga, Alicia Thies, Devin Thies, Kelsie Lewis and husband, Chris, Travis Turner; his great-grandchildren, Charlie Mae Gorsuch, Zachary Lewis and Baby Lane on the way. He is also survived by his brothers, Alfred Larrañaga and wife Corrine, Leo Larrañaga and wife Viola, Percy Larrañaga and wife Ann, Victor Larrañaga and wife Stella, Ernest Archibeque and wife Maggie; his sisters, Josie Thomas and husband Al, Viola Marez, Reyes Perea and husband Jake, MaryEllen Villanueva and husband Henry, Angie Lopez and husband Max, Trinnie Chilton and husband Randy, Kay Cordova and husband Joseph, Genie Hofeldt and husband Wayne. He also leaves many cherished nieces, nephews, and extended family. Lorenzo was preceded in death by his father and mother, Leocadio and Aurelia Larrañaga; brother, Bennie Larrañaga and wife Nora; brothers-in-law, Butch Del Curto and Leandro Marez; nephews, EJ Perea and Dante Del Curto; and niece, Aurelina Lopez.

A Rosary will be recited Friday, October 12, 2018, 6:00 p.m., at Our Lady of the Assumption Catholic Church, 811 Guaymas Pl NE, Albuquerque, NM 87108. Mass of Christian Burial will be celebrated Saturday, October 13, 2018, 10:00 a.m., at Our Lady of the Annunciation Catholic Church, 2621 Vermont St. NE, Albuquerque, NM 87110. Interment will follow at the Larrañaga Ranch Cemetery, Red Hills, NM. Reception to immediately follow interment at the Larrañaga Ranch. To celebrate the life of Larry Larrañaga, in lieu of flowers, the family has made arrangements for memorial gifts to be made to the either the UNM School of Engineering or Department of Neurology. Memorial contributions can be mailed to the UNM Foundation, Two Woodward Center, 700 Lomas Blvd. NE, Albuquerque, NM 87102 or made online at https://www.unmfund.org/fund/memorials-tributes/ . (Please include a note stating who your gift memorializes.)