The arts in New Jersey do not make for such strange bedfellows after all.

Creative types in the state do connect sometimes, and sometimes the union is an entity unto itself. To celebrate Valentine’s Day, we met with three power couples of the Jersey arts scene to learn how romance, creative minds, kids and the business of arts mix.

The lessons are as varied as the people and arts of Jersey.

Eryn Shewell and

Matt O’Ree, musicians

Eryn Shewell and Matt O’Ree make beautiful music together.

Literally.

Shewell is one of the most dynamic blues vocalists in the region and O’Ree is nationally recognized for his fiery blues-rock vocals and guitar playing. He’s played in Bon Jovi and a guy named Bruce Springsteen from Freehold plays and sings on his latest album, “Brotherhood.”

Like Springsteen and the late E Street Band saxophonist, Clarence Clemons, Shewell and O’Ree met at the Wonder Bar in Asbury Bar. O’Ree was there checking out the scene and Shewell caught his eye on stage.

Shewell noticed him, too. “I mustered up the moxie to say hello,” Shewell said. “We started chatting and then we became friends. That was over 10 years ago — he wasn’t ready for anything serious yet. The timing wasn’t working.”

Musicians have a great sense of timing.

“It only took me 10 years to figure out that Eryn was the one,” O’Ree said. “Eventually, I smartened up. I always wondered, being a musician, is being with another musician, would that make sense? Would there be a conflict of interest? Would we argue about our careers?”

The answer is no for Shewell and O’Ree.

“It works so well,” O’Ree said. “We support each other’s careers as well. It’s a pretty amazing connection we have.”

They both perform at each other’s shows.

“I’m proud to stand next to her on stage when she belts it out,” O’Ree said. “Some of our happiest moments are standing on stage next to each other.”

MORE: A rocker's Christmas proposal on the Wonder Bar stage

O’Ree proposed to Shewell on stage at the Wonder Bar in December. She said yes.

Shewell’s daughter Emily, 13, signed on.

“She kept it a secret from mom,” O’Ree said.

Larry “Kapital” Gaines, performer and manager, and Janine Robertson-Gaines, manager

The family is all about business.

Larry “Kapital” Gaines and Janine Robertson-Gaines of Newark were high school sweethearts at Piscataway High School in the 1990s. Gaines made a name for himself when as Left Gunzz he scored himself a few high profile gigs as a hip-hop musician, including appearances on New York City radio’s Funkmaster Flex and Wendy Williams shows.

Now, the Gaineses are using lessons they learned back in the day in service of their two children, Leah Jenea, 16, who’s been racking up Amateur Night Apollo Theater wins, and son Troi Allan,13, who was part of the “Kinky Boots” national tour.

MORE: Valentine's Day cards for that not-so-special someone

“(Larry’s) the numbers and creative one, but I’m the one who was more vocal and more hustling to get them out there,” Janine said. “When it started to get deeper and he saw that she (Leah Jenea) was writing her own music, that’s when he jumped in.”

Getting a name for yourself in the entertainment world is similar but not exactly the same as it was 15 years ago. The Gaineses, together for 18 years and married for nine, are applying the lessons they learned during Larry’s hip-hop days to their kids’ careers.

“One thing you have to watch out for and be careful of is that your social media image could destroy you real quick with cameras, phones and pictures,” Larry said. “All it takes now is one bad meme and you’re done for a couple of weeks until everybody forgets about it.”

Dad recently got into the act with Leah Jenea and Perth Amboy hip-hop star Miilkbone for a song called “Ain’t Right.” They shot a video, too.

“I’d say, ‘This is my dad,’ and the look would be: ‘Left Gunzz!’ ” Leah Jenea said.

Larry’s “Reel Street Viewz” show on Facebook is gaining momentum. He’s interviewed the Wu Tang Clan, Mobb Deep, Pete Rock and Jaheim.

It’s all hands on deck as Larry’s parents, James and Grace Gaines, and Marcia Smith, Janine’s mom, all contribute to the family brand.

“It’s deep, all the way down to how my parents supported us,” Larry said. “The whole family is in. It’s the family hustle. Hashtag family hustle!”

Brittany James and

Patrick Schiavino, artists

There is a burgeoning visual arts scene in Asbury Park.

Patrick Schiavino and Brittany James are in the middle of it. Both are painters and Schiavino is the owner of the city’s Art 629 gallery on Cookman Avenue. He’s also the founder of the hit Asbury Underground art gallery crawl.

“It’s nice when the person you’re with supports what you do and supports the amount of time you spend on your art and artistic side,” said Schiavino, also a long-time developer and real estate agent in the city.

James teaches art at the gallery and also at Inspired Minds Fine Art School in Lincroft. You’ll see her on stage sometimes painting stage-wide murals with Mallory Massara at Glen Burtnik concerts.

MORE: Brits and bikinis a social media hit

Schiavino and James started dating about two and half years ago.

“Being a painter or a writer or a profession where you work alone could be a very lonely experience because you’re spending 10, 12 hours in a studio by yourself, you go a little stir crazy,” Schiavino said. “So I think that having somebody around is good, and someone around who understands the process you’re going through, who shares an ethos and a lifestyle, because it is a lifestyle.”

The couple that paints together stays together.

“We do (paint together) and we don’t talk to each for three hours,” James said. “We put on really loud music.”

Their styles are different. Schiavino is an abstract painter and James is representational. Yet, both have an eye for bright, striking colors and both work in oils.

“My friend says he’s in outer space and I’m in Neverland,” said James of their styles.

Chris Jordan: cjordan@app.com

MORE JERSEY ARTS

POWER COUPLES

Dorothea Bongiovi, philanthropist, and Jon Bon Jovi, musician and philanthropist — This couple, who live in Middletown, use their influence to empower the less fortunate with their Soul Kitchen restaurants in Red Bank and Toms River.

Beth McLoone, restaurateur, and Tim McLoone, restaurateur, musician — This Little Silver couple operates the McLoone restaurants of the Jersey Shore and Central Jersey, and Tim McLoone is a prominent figure on the Shore music scene. The Tim McLoone’s Supper Club in Asbury Park brings some of the biggest names in show business to the boardwalk.

Patti Scialfa and Bruce Springsteen, musicians — This Colts Neck couple is known around the world and are involved in many area charities. Scialfa is a member of the Count Basie Theatre of Red Bank’s board of advisers.

Lisa Sherman and Franke Previte, musicians — This Oceanport pair has been lighting up stages in Jersey in recent months when they sing the Previte-penned "(I've Had) The Time of My Life" from "Dirty Dancing." Previte is involved in production now.

Maureen Van Zandt, actress, producer, and Steven Van Zandt, musician, actor and producer — This couple lives in New York City but they have deep Jersey roots. The Van Zandts, who both appeared on TV’s “The Sopranos,” are on the Count Basie Theatre’s board of trustees and directors.