Editor’s Note: In September 2012, Civil Beat sent six questions to each of the candidates running in the Nov. 6 general election for Hawaii Legislature. The questions and answers are reproduced below in full. Click on each topic listed below to read Civil Beat’s question and the candidate’s response.

General Excise Tax

Environmental Regulatory Review

Gambling

Sunshine Law

Best and Worst Legislation

Overlooked Issue

Preferred Candidate Name: Les Ihara, Jr.

Party Affiliation: Democratic Party of Hawaii

Senate/House District Number: Senate District 10

Date of Birth: 04/19/51

Place of Birth/Hometown: Honolulu

Current Profession/Employer: Legislator, State Senate

Education/Alma Mater(s): University of Hawaii

1. With the exception for Honolulu rail, the state has not raised the general excise tax in decades. Would you consider increasing the GET to help the state meet its budget demands?

I am generally opposed to increasing the GET, particularly for unspecified purposes, because I believe state government needs to improve its financial efficiency. In order to consider a GET increase, I would need to have confidence that existing resources are being used effectively and the additional funds are necessary to provide a vital function of government. ↩ back to top

2. Lawmakers proposed relaxing environmental regulatory review to spur development and job growth in the 2012 session, and the issue is expected to resurface next year. Where do you stand?

At this time, I cannot support relaxing environmental regulations for new developments. I am open to some relaxation of regulations as long as environmental concerns and public input are adequately addressed. ↩ back to top

3. Gambling — are you for it or against it? If not, why not? If so, what type of gambling and with what kind of restrictions?

I am opposed to allowing legalized gambling in the state, mainly because of concerns about social and economic impacts that may be harmful to our community. ↩ back to top

4. The Sunshine Law is a hallmark of an open democracy accountable to its citizens. Yet, the Legislature exempts itself from this requirement. Do you support more transparency in government operations, or are there legitimate reasons to conduct some of the people’s business behind closed doors?

I support more transparency in government, including having the legislature comply with fundamental provisions of the sunshine law, e.g. requiring 6-day hearing/meeting notices, allowing public testimony on legislative rules. Because the legislature must complete its work in a 60-day session, it is probably impractical to adopt the entire sunshine law for the legislature. ↩ back to top

5. What is the best legislation — and worst legislation — that the Legislature has approved in recent years? Please explain.

I believe the best legislation provided funding for the Kupuna Care Program, which provides safety net services for frail and needy senior citizens in our community. I believe the worst legislation is the establishment of the Public Lands Development Corporation, because it lacks basic safeguards to ensure public input, protect the environment, and avoid possible corruption and abuse of power. ↩ back to top

6. What is an issue that you would champion at the Legislature — one that perhaps has not received much attention, or an issue that is important to your district?