Demographics

As of 2001 India census, Gangakhed had a population of 40,412. Males constitute 51% of the population and females 49%. Gangakhed has an average literacy rate of 60%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 68%, and female literacy is 52%. In Gangakhed, 16% of the population is under 6 years of age which may have changed significantly through the last decade. GANGAKHED is the largest Taluka in Parbhani district.

Education

There are many schools in Gangakhed for the primary and secondary education. Along with these, there is "Sant Janabai" college which was a established in 1972. It has all educational facilities for three year degree courses in Arts, Commerce and Science. There are many small colleges for D.Ed., B.Ed., BCS, BCA. All the colleges in Gangakhed are affiliated with Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University, Nanded.

Industry

There is a sugar factory By Ratnakar Gutte with a combined cycle power plant in Gangakhed which caters to the sugarcane farmers in the local region. Several small-scale businesses and business agencies thrive mostly around agricultural sector. There is also edible oil industry which runs by public and private sector; the region is famous for edible oil production and also famous for cotton production and related industries because Gangakhed is located on Deccan Trap and the bank of river Godavari so the regur soil is there and is very useful for cotton production.

Hospitals

A government hospital and several private hospitals are operational in the town. Patients can get good quality healthcare locally. But for high end medical facilities, diagnoses, treatments and procedures, they have to go to nearby cities such as Parbhani, Nanded and Aurangabad.

Hindu temples

Gangakhed is the birthplace of Shree Sant Janabai. As it is situated on the bank of Godawari river it has largest number of various temples on the bank of the holy river. The Balaji temple which is the only temple like Tirupati Balaji, having both Balaji and Govinda under one roof. From many years Navratra festival is celebrated with the big event "Rath Yatra". Also, the Chintamani Mandir, of lord Ganesha, which is situated near the Balaji Temple on the bank of river, giving a nice view of Godawari river. People celebrate Cahturthi and other poojas at this temple. Some more temples to mention are - Bomblya mahadev, Narsimha mandir both placed on the river bank, Datta Mandir is also one of the important temple in Gangakhed.

Transportation

Railway

Gangakhed has a train station which is located between Parbhani Junction and Parli Junction.

Road

Gangakhed has direct roads to Parbhani, Parli, Nanded,Ahmedpur,Latur.

Water

Although Gangakhed is situated on the bank of Godavari, a major river in the country, it does not have any means of transportation via water due to lack of enough water level and preference toward road and rail transports.