By DENNIS DEITCH dendeitch@gmail.com

The Dallas Mavericks will get the services of Elton Brand, a consummate pro with something left in the tank, for $2.1 million next season.

The 76ers will get the services of Kwame Brown, one of the biggest flops in draft history who played in just nine games last season, for $3 million next season … and give him an option to make about that much the following season.

So continues an immensely surreal summer for the Sixers. Brand, on whose $18.2 million salary the Sixers decided to apply the NBA’s one-time amnesty option in order to clear it from their salary cap, was claimed as expected by the veteran-loaded Mavs. The price tag was light for Dallas, which had to make sure it paid more than any of the other 28 teams was willing to put up for the 33-year-old forward.

The Sixers will pay the remaining $16.1 million, while the Mavs get a guy who averaged 11 points and 7.2 rebounds in 60 games last season.

In order to fill the hole left in the frontcourt, the Sixers followed a couple of acquisitions considered gambles with a guy who has made a career out of making front offices exhibit buyer’s remorse.

Brown was the No. 1 overall pick in the 2001, two years after Brand was the top overall selection. That pick was made by the Washington

Wizards and was the first of what has become a laughable history of bad personnel suggestions by Michael Jordan.

The coach of that Wizards squad was Doug Collins. He coached Brown for two seasons after he went pro immediately after high school and is perhaps the only guy in basketball with an affinity for the 7-footer.

Brown, 30, averaged 6.3 points and 6.3 rebounds in those nine games he played for Golden State last season, meaning he made about $750,000 per game. He has averaged 6.8 points and 5.6 rebounds in 585 career games, and has committed 119 more personal fouls in his career than he has blocked shots, assists and steals combined.

After the signing became news Friday, there was speculation the Sixers might attempt to go with a Spencer Hawes-Brown combination in the starting frontcourt. That would assume a lot out of Brown, who seems to save his barely competent seasons for when a team has zero expectations for him.

Speaking of low expectations, the signing doesn’t speak well of what the team thinks Nik Vucevic can provide in his second season. Vucevic played well as a rookie in the first half of 2012, before slumping and getting banished to the pine by Collins. The hope was Vucevic would work on his upper-body strength and come back strong in the fall, but his first test was scuttled when an Achilles’ heel injury left him on the sidelines for the Orlando Summer League games this week.

In even worse news from the final day of the OSL, guard Xavier Silas – who was signed in the final week of last season by the Sixers – suffered a concussion and a possible skull fracture after catching an elbow Friday in a game against the Pistons. Silas was hospitalized, but recovered enough to send a message on Twitter from his phone.