DALLAS – For all the ways to size up a box score, all Lakers coach Phil Jackson had to do Thursday night was look at the rebounding totals to see just how badly his team missed injured starters Lamar Odom and Kwame Brown.

So it was that the Lakers were outrebounded 53-28 by the Dallas Mavericks, putting up little resistance in losing 114-95 to the NBA’s best team and failing to build off Wednesday’s victory at San Antonio.

Even if Odom and Brown might not have made a difference against a Mavericks team that has lost one game in the last 38 days, the Lakers wouldn’t have minded adding to the equation the 15.3 rebounds the two were averaging before they were hurt.

“Any time you get beat up that bad on the inside like we did tonight,” Jackson said, “you’re not going to have much of a chance of performing in the ballgame.”

At halftime, Jackson was handed a stat sheet showing that the Mavericks had more offensive rebounds (14) than the Lakers had total rebounds (13). Andrew Bynum and Smush Parker were the Lakers’ leading rebounders for the game with five each.

“A lot of rebounding has to do with just effort,” forward Luke Walton said. “That shows they wanted it more than us tonight, I guess.”

The Mavericks won their sixth game in a row and avenged the Jan. 7 loss to the Lakers at Staples Center that ended their 13-game winning streak. The Lakers had no answer for either Josh Howard (29 points, 11 rebounds) or Dirk Nowitzki (27 points, 10 rebounds).

“We didn’t have much of a presence out there tonight,” Jackson said.

Dallas (33-8) shot 54.5 percent for the game and blew away the Lakers in the middle two quarters, winning the second quarter 34-20 and the third quarter 35-24. The Lakers trailed by as many as 28 points in the third quarter, their biggest deficit of the season.

“We know they’re a great team, we give them the credit,” Walton said, “but we feel like we’re a better team than we were tonight.”

Nobody enjoyed it more than Dallas owner Mark Cuban, who sat in his courtside seat wearing a “Talk nerdy to me” T-shirt, and raised his fist in celebration as the Mavericks took control of the game.

Even so, the Lakers led 28-26 at the end of the first quarter, with Kobe Bryant having scored two points and getting everyone involved with four assists. They went cold in the second quarter, however, and the Mavericks surged just before halftime.

Backup guard Anthony Johnson hit two tough shots with the 24-second clock expiring in the last minute of the half. Dallas went into halftime with a 60-48 lead and Jackson had a message for his players at halftime.

“I told the starters they didn’t have much wiggle room out there,” Jackson said, “or else they were going to get in jeopardy, and (the words) were right on.”