Queen Marie-Henriette (1836-1902)

This thread is about Queen Marie-Henriette of The Belgians, born Princess Imperial & Archduchess of Austria, Princess Royal of Hungary & Bohemia (Budapest 23 Aug 1836-Spa 20 Sept 1902)

Parents: Archduke Joseph of Austria, Palatine of Hungary and Duchess Maria-Dorothea of Wurttemberg

Husband: King Leopold II of The Belgians

Children: Duchess Louise of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, Crownprince Leopold of Belgium, Crownprincess Stephanie of Austria, Princess Clementine Napoleon

Siblings: Archduchess Franziska and Archduke Alexander of Austria, Archduchess Elisabeth of Ausria-Este and Archduke Karl-Ludwig of Austria

Half-siblings: Archduchess Alexandrine, Archduchess Hermine and Archduke Stephen of Austria.

Note that all pictures posted by me are free from copyrights. They were found randomly on various sites.

In 1853 Marie-Henriette has to marry Crownprince Leopold of the belgians. It is a purely political match as the Belgians saw this marriage as a way to ensure that they won´t be invaded by Napoleon III. The marriage would become extremely unhappy, especially because Leopold II was a cruel man. The Queen however doesn´t say much about it but when the King spends more and more time the Queen retreats to Spa, where she dies in 1902.

This is what Queen Victoria wrote of her in 1858 (5 years after she had married Leopold):

"[She]....is looking very pretty and is I think very sensible about herself and the child - but she is becoming very reserved and though I think there is no real love or affection between them - she never allows a word to be said against Leopold who in revanche is much kinder to her than he was and always praises her now."

After the death of her son, Queen Victoria described her as having 'wonderful strength of mind and great faith' ...She must have had to put up with being married to Leopold!!

Her only son, Leopold, dies at the age of 9. He fell in a pond in the gardens of Laeken Castle and died of the amnesia that followed. After this she has to return to the bed of the King. Their short-lived reconsiliation results in another daughter: Clementine. After this the King didn´t hide his contempt for his wife while Marie-Henriette grew more and more cold and distant.

A picture of Marie-Henriette and her son:

I am not aware how the relations with her daughter were but I reacall that her eldest daughter Princess Louise didn´t have many nice things to say.

Though Marie-Henriette preferred the company of horses and dogs, she did care for others. So was she sent to Miramar, to bring Carlota back to Belgium. She was very kind and took responsibility for her. and spent as much time with her as posible. After Carlota ws restored to health Marie Henriette, wrote a friend and said "You cannot imagine how beautiful she is now, never so beautiful before". She was as kind as her husband was brutal. She must have had a sad life with him.

Marie-Henriette and Carlota on a churchwindow:

Hi,

I don't mean to be rude to say this but I made a post above which I asked if there is a book about Queen Maire-Henriette of the Belgians in English? She sounds interesting. It seems that no one answer my question. Hope someone will answer my question.

Thanks,

Chantal Clement.

I can't recall an english book about Marie-Henriette either. there is the one of Mia kerckehove but that is only available in French and Dutch. The next best thing would probably be to read 'The Coburgs of Belgium' by Theo Aronson. It is an overview of the Belgian monarchy, but with a lot of focus on leopold II and his wife & daughters. You can find a JSTOR review of the book here.

Hi Marengo and Elisabetteke

Thank you for your help.. I wish there is a book about Queen Marie-Henriette in English. Although, I don't read French or Dutch. You both tried your best to find it in English. Hope it will be in English one day!

Chantal

poor woman such a beauty i feel bad for her.Her life could have been better if she had not marry that cruel king. I wonder why she never ask for an annulment from the vatican to free herself from her husband , i know she would be discriminate but at least she could have a happy life instead of living with a husband who openly have have mistress in the palace, dislike by most of his subject and somehow have no empathy for her .i must say she has one of the saddest life as a royalty

queen marie of romania ounce wrote the the difficulty is that we princes have to marry foreign princes

and i bet queen marie henriette had her difficulties

You are welcome. I am a huge sidesaddle enthusiast..so the only pictures I have of Royalty are equestrian related and usually found in either antique stores or e-bay.

ETA - I am really surprised that from all I have read about how she prefered the company of her animals over other people - that more photos were not taken of her with her beloved pets.

Confessor priest

Is there any information on who her priest was? I am trying to find out if a Father Ephraim was her priest confessor. He is a relative of the Facon line of my family. Family lore says that one of the Facons became a Jesuit priest and was the father confessor of either Queen Marie-Henreitte or Queen Asrtid.