March 2, 2021—BOCA RATON, FL- The American Association of Caregiving Youth (AACY) is hosting a Game Night fundraiser to benefit the middle and high school Caregiving Youth they serve. These students all assist family member(s) who are chronically ill, injured, elderly or disabled.

Game Night will be held on Monday, March 29 at 6 p.m. at Crazy Uncle Mike’s in Boca Raton. AACY Board Member and Treasurer, Debralyn Belletieri, is leading the planning effort; and special guest emcee Vice Mayor Robert Weinroth will be on hand to host the event.

“We are planning a safe, fun night out in support of AACY,” Debralyn said. “This is a new fundraising idea for us, and we believe it will be a hit!”

Modeled after the popular game show, this Family Feud-style Game Night will feature teams of up to five people, competing against one another to name the most popular responses to questions.

AACY President and Founder Connie Siskowski, RN, PhD added, “We are grateful to Michael Goodwin, the owner of Crazy Uncle Mike’s, for the opportunity to host our fundraiser there safely, in a great space with bountiful food and drink. We have a fun evening planned and look forward to seeing you in person!”

For more information or to sign up for Game Night, please visit this link: https://www.eventbrite.com/e/aacy-game-night-tickets-142124475131.

Founded in 1998 by Dr. Siskowski, what is now AACY currently serves more than 400 caregiving youth (with more enrolled each day), in 33 middle and high schools throughout Palm Beach County; and proudly boasts the Caregiving Youth Project (CYP), founded in 2006 which has served more than 1,800 caregiving youth and their families. The CYP provides professional services in school, out of school and at home as well as supports students and their families with a myriad of needs-driven wraparound services with the help of collaborating partners.

The AACY is a Florida based 501(c) (3) non-profit corporation. Today it is the only organization of its kind in the United States for addressing the issues surrounding the silent, vulnerable, and hidden population, conservatively estimated to exceed 5 million children ages 8-18 years who provide care for chronically ill, injured, elderly or disabled family members. In partnership with schools, it prioritizes students in greatest need of services and increases their ability to remain in school through counseling, education, activities, mentorship, and respite while strengthening families by linking them with community services. To donate to AACY, volunteer or for more information go to www.aacy.org, email info@aacy.org or call 561-391-7401.

January 27, 2021—BOCA RATON, FL

The American Association of Caregiving Youth (AACY) is collecting Valentine’s Day cards, letters, and any other small tokens of love and appreciation for the middle and high school Caregiving Youth they serve, in honor of Valentine’s Day on Sunday, February 14. These students all assist family member(s) who are chronically ill, injured, elderly or disabled.

AACY Board Member and Treasurer, Debralyn Belletieri, came up with the idea to send each of the youth Valentine’s Day cards, a project that her vibrant, 94-year-old mother-in-law was thrilled to help with.

“She loves to keep busy and a project like this is perfect for her,” Debralyn said. “Then I thought, why not reach out to our community who have been so incredibly generous and supportive of AACY, our efforts, and our Youth. Every time we ask for help, support, volunteers, items, you name it, our community is there.”

“Caregiving Youth are at the heart of all that AACY does,” AACY President and Founder Connie Siskowski, RN, PhD said. “Especially in this time of isolation for so many, reaching out to our community in support of our Youth is mutually beneficial. People want to help others and feel needed in return.”

Items (suggestions include: ring pops, sweethearts, gummy candies, heart stress balls, lip gloss, red nail polish, Beanie Baby-sized stuffed animals, or anything with small hearts on it) for AACY may be dropped off or mailed to the AACY office at 6401 Congress Ave. Suite 200 in Boca Raton; or can be arranged for pick up. Financial contributions are also graciously accepted, and may be made online at aacy.org. All items and donations must be received before Wednesday, February 10.

For more information on how to help with the AACY Valentine’s Day project or AACY, please contact Kelly Cronin, Communications Manager at: 561.391.7401 or by email: kelly@aacy.org

Founded in 1998 by Dr. Siskowski, what is now AACY currently serves more than 400 caregiving youth (with more enrolled each day), in 32 middle and high schools throughout Palm Beach County; and proudly boasts the Caregiving Youth Project (CYP), founded in 2006 which has served nearly 1,800 caregiving youth. The CYP provides professional services in school, out of school and at home as well as supports students and their families with a myriad of needs-driven wraparound services with the help of collaborating partners.

The American Association of Caregiving Youth (AACY) is a Florida based 501(c) (3) non-profit corporation that began serving the greater Boca Raton community in 1998. Today it is the only organization of its kind in the United States for addressing the issues surrounding the silent, vulnerable, and hidden population, conservatively estimated to exceed 5 million children ages 8-18 years who provide care for chronically ill, injured, elderly or disabled family members. In partnership with schools, it prioritizes students in greatest need of services and increases their ability to remain in school through counseling, education, activities, and respite while strengthening families by linking them with community services. To donate to AACY, volunteer or for more information go to www.aacy.org, email info@aacy.org or call 561-391-7401.

Thursday, October 29, 2020

Remember Kids are Caregivers Too throughout the USA and globally BOCA RATON, Fla. – Oct. 29, 2020 – PRLog — BOCA RATON, FL – During November, National Family Caregivers Month, our County and our Country recognize and offer thanks to family members of all ages who are humble heroes. Behind their closed doors, they keep their families strong, pandemic or no pandemic,” states Robert Weinroth, Vice Mayor of Palm Beach County. The American Association of Caregiving Youth® (AACY) and its program that identifies and supports middle and high school students is now in its 14th year. Many of the children it serves began their caregiving journey before entering middle school, where they first enroll in the AACY program. In addition to being students, they regularly assist family members who are chronically ill, injured, elderly or disabled, and remain with the AACY program for more than five years. According to Pamela Perrin, COO of AACY, “In partnership with The School District of Palm Beach County, we provide them with free support services in and out of school and at home, resulting in a six-year average high school graduation rate of 98.3%.” With the onset of COVID-19, the Caregiving Youth program team continues some of their work remotely as those it serves have been significantly impacted. The need for academic and personal support has increased, and nearly 80% of the hundreds of its participants are struggling with virtual learning. Families, already confronted with various health conditions, fear for their children to return to brick and mortar school, and potential increased virus exposure for their already vulnerable and predominantly financially insecure families. What can be done to help? In addition to saying thank you to caregiving youth, donate to AACY, become a tutor (math is especially needed), a mentor, or volunteer. For more information, visit www.aacy.org, email info@aacy.org or call Dr. Connie Siskowski AACY President and Founder as well as 2012 CNN Top Ten Hero, at 561-391-7401. About the American Association of Caregiving Youth® The American Association of Caregiving Youth (AACY) is a Florida based 501(c) (3) non-profit corporation that began serving the greater Boca Raton community in 1998. Today it is the only organization of its kind in the United States for addressing the issues surrounding the silent, vulnerable and hidden population, conservatively estimated to exceed 3 million children ages 8-18 years who provide care for ill, injured, elderly or disabled family members. In partnership with schools, it prioritizes students in greatest need of services and increases their ability to remain in school through counseling, education, activities and respite while strengthening families by linking them with community services. The Caregiving Youth Institute, affiliates, and national partnerships complement its outreach.

Media Contact Connie Siskowski