In April last year, Howard Goldsmith bought station WSBR-AM in Boca Raton, Fla. Its ''oldies'' format had been losing money. Because Boca Raton is popular with wealthy retirees, Mr. Goldsmith immediately changed the station's format to all-business. This year, he said, the station will make a profit.

Around the country, a handful of AM radio stations, desperate for listeners, are searching for niche programming that can deliver targeted audiences to advertisers. It is the same strategy that many cable-television programmers and special-interest magazine publishers have long followed: forget about a broad audience. Find instead a special group of heavy-spending consumers. Then fashion a format to appeal to them.

The big spenders do not even have to be adults. Radio, like television, is now catering to children. Seven weeks ago, WPRD-AM of Orlando, Fla., switched its format from big-band music to programming for youngsters, becoming the first member of the new Kids Choice Programming Network. Among the network's investors, and creative talents, is Peter Yarrow, of Peter, Paul and Mary.

The FM Stranglehold

AM Gives Up on A Mass Audience

Owners of AM stations hope that their new, narrower strategies will rescue an industry that has been ailing for more than a decade. Two generations that have grown up listening to FM stations rarely switch to the AM band. The problems are so great, particularly for many of the smaller AM stations, that ''they have given up on reaching mass audiences,'' said Jim Duncan, whose Indianapolis-based company, American Radio, reports on the radio industry. ''They are trying to find any niche they can.''

Mr. Duncan recites the daunting statistics of the AM business. By late 1989, FM stations had 75 percent of the listening audience and 77 percent of advertising revenues. But there are more AM than FM stations, leaving the AM stations with average revenues of $361,000, the FM stations with $1.4 million. Prices of AM stations range from $100,000 to $26 million. FM stations start at $1.5 million and go to $100 million, a price that will also buy a substantial business in television.

Like other media that depend on the troubled retailing industry, radio's advertising revenues have stagnated. In 1989, about 80 percent of radio's $7.9 billion in advertising came from local sources, primarily retail. This year, advertising will probably be up only about 5 percent, according to Robert Coen, who follows industry spending for McCann-Erikson, the advertising agency. The industry has been used to gains of 8 or 9 percent.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.