BOCA RATON, Fla., Nov. 5, 2009 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Keith Singer and Jarred Elmar of Insured Returns LLC host a daily financial radio program which focuses on current financial events and low risk retirement growth and income strategies. The program airs daily from 2pm to 3pm on www.wsbrradio.com and on 740am in Boca Raton Florida. On Friday November 6th, 2009 Jeff Sonn will appear on the broadcast to discuss the latest updates on the Scott Rothstein scandal. Jeff Sonn is a partner in Sonn & Erez, a nationally known securities litigation firm, who is investigating claims that Scott Rothstein, a Fort Lauderdale attorney with strong Republican ties including to Florida Governor Charlie Christ, may be involved in the fraudulent sale of fictitious legal settlements in excess of $100,000,000. These transactions where investors purchase a plaintiff's claim in advance of the plaintiff's collecting their awards are sometimes referred to as "settlement advances." It is has been alleged that Rothstein may have promoted the sale of settlements that didn't actually exist. It may have also been incorrectly reported that Rothstein's fraud involved the sale of "structured settlements." Structured Settlements involve the use of insurance contracts to insure the payment of completed settlements. Although the term structured settlements has been extensively used in the media's characterization of Rothstein's fraud, that term may actually be inapplicable to Rothstein's scheme which purportedly involved settlement advances, the sale of settlements which had not yet been fully funded by the defendants.

Jeff Sonn has been investigating claims of some of Rothstein's alleged victims and on Friday's program, Sonn will discuss some of his findings. He will also provide an update to the progress he is making in representing some of Bernie Madoff's victims. Moreover Sonn will give some general advice to investors on how to protect themselves from fraud.

Keith Singer, JD CFP is a prominent South Florida financial advisor who created Insured Returns LLC to deliver guaranteed growth and income strategies to conservative investors. Insured Returns LLC provides a variety of financial strategies that are designed to create annualized returns in the range of 7-8% without any investment risk. Keith Singer and Jarred Elmar have hosted the daily financial show "Cashing In" since 2006 and have sent a continuous message over the airways advising listeners to be extremely cautious with their money and to place greater emphasis on the safety and predictability of their investment choices.