The Most Honourable Order of the Bath, order of British knighthood established by King George I in 1725, conferred as a reward either for military service or for exemplary civilian merit. Like most chivalric orders, it has antecedents that reach far before the actual date of its founding. Bathing as a purification ritual was probably introduced in a religious context with knighthood in the 11th century, but it has been attributed even earlier to the court of Charlemagne during the 8th century. From the coronation of Henry IV (1399), who traditionally has been considered the founder of the Order of the Bath, to the coronation of Charles II (1661), it became customary to create a certain number of knights during royal occasions of great brilliance. The medieval “knights of the bath,” as they were called, took precedence over knights bachelor, from whose ranks they had been promoted, but they never formed an order of chivalry. When George I, advised by his prime minister Robert Walpole, created the order, he believed that he was reviving an ancient order that had, in fact, never existed.

Originally membership comprised the British monarch, a great master of the order, and 36 knights. Membership regulations have undergone numerous changes over the centuries. Three classes of knights were instituted in 1815 to commemorate the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Corresponding classes were added in 1847 for a civilian division. The order currently includes the monarch, members of the royal family, foreigners (known as “honorary members”), and the classes of knights—115 Knights or Dames Grand Cross (GCB), 328 Knights or Dames Commanders (KCB or DCB, respectively), and 1,815 Companions (CB). Investiture into the two highest classes (Knight/Dame Grand Cross and Knight/Dame Commander) means induction into knighthood, if the candidate does not already hold that honour, and the right to the title of “Sir” or “Dame” as appropriate. (Knights and Dames Grand Cross, together with Knights of the Garter and of the Thistle, may be granted the use of supporters with their arms.) The officers of the order are the Dean (usually the Dean of Westminster), Bath King of Arms, Registrar, Usher of the Scarlet Rod, and Secretary. Ladies are admitted to all classes of the order.