Bill Gray has made a name for himself as a football coach. He has coached the sport 42 years in Pacifica at Oceana and Terra Nova high schools and is coming off a Central Coast Section Division III championship won by his Terra Nova team last fall.

But unless you go back a while following San Mateo County prep sports you might not know he was once a very successful wrestling coach.

Gray’s Oceana teams won four consecutive Central Coast Section championships from 1983-86, still the only CCS team wrestling championships won by a San Mateo County school. Additionally, the Sharks won a CCS dual-meet championship, four regional titles and a Northern California championship when those were contested, as well as 14 league championships. They finished as high as third in the state.

Gray is being inducted into the California Wrestling Hall of Fame on May 14 at the San Jose Airport Garden Hotel.

Chuck Kent, the former Crestmoor coach and Peninsula Athletic League commissioner, will receive a Lifetime Service Award.

Gray got his start in wrestling at Clayton Valley High School where he wrestled for Bill Martell, the future U.S. Olympic team coach, and Roger Zino. He became the head wrestling coach at Oceana in 1972.

“At that time the school and the athletic department were searching for an identity,” Gray said. “The athletic talent pool was not the type to have winning football and basketball teams year after year. The school had success in sports like cross-country and lightweight basketball. Once we started having success in wrestling the thing steamrolled, became something the school could hang its hat on. We had a group of kids looking for success and phenomenal support from parents and the school.”

It’s a shame to see the way the sport has declined at the scholastic level since the 1970s and ’80s. Many schools have dropped the sport or only have a handful of participants.

Gray has a perspective on that and on wrestling’s place in the popular imagination.

“Back then we had to overcome the stigma of professional wrestling,” Gray said. “A lot of people were ignorant about scholastic wrestling. Now we’re combating mixed martial arts.

“People don’t appreciate the beauty of wrestling. Wrestling is not fighting, it’s something more than that. Football and wrestling are the two combative sports. Football is easier to understand. Some schools are relieved they don’t have wrestling any more.”

Poly Bowl: Football players from San Mateo County will be heavily represented Saturday on the Bay team in the Polynesian All-Star Bowl at Fairfield High School. The Bay team, which beat the Valley team last year, will hold practices from 6-8 p.m. Wednesday and Thursday at San Mateo High.

The San Mateo County players on the Bay roster include Cheyenne Meafua, Viane Visesio, Ezekiel Nunu and Ngalu Fusimalohi from Jefferson; Semisi Mataele, Junior Sakalia and Semisi Tuitupou from Menlo-Atherton; Lemoto Filikitonga (San Mateo), Vita Taungahihifo (Sequoia), Chris Vea (Carlmont), Siaosi Lata (Woodside), Trevor Kelly (El Camino) and Darren Tufono (South San Francisco).

County sports notes: Several former San Mateo County prep players are contributing for the San Francisco State baseball team. Will Klein (Sequoia) got the game-winning hit Saturday against Sonoma State, a two-run single in the eighth inning. Former Burlingame players Andrew Suvannachuen, Trevor Pasiecznik and Chris Schindler are all seeing plenty of playing time. … Former Menlo School standout Kenny Diekroeger is tearing it up at Stanford, leading the team in hitting at .351. … Adrianna Vogt (Sacred Heart Prep) was voted Mountain Pacific Sports Federation women’s water polo Player of the Week for San Jose State after scoring six goals in a game against USC. … The Notre Dame de Namur men’s team clinched the Western Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association title Sunday with a 13-8 win over Mesa State. … The Sequoia High baseball alumni game takes place at 11 a.m. April 30, followed by a barbecue and awards ceremony.