In 1971 when Bill Gray took his first teaching job, he was looking for a community with a small town atmosphere. He found it in Pacifica and over the next 42 years he became a legend, coaching at both Oceana and Terra Nova high schools.

Retiring last year, he was looking for a similar community where he could retire. He found it in Oacoma, South Dakota, a community with a populous of 350.

“It is quiet, slow and very relaxed. Most of the kids come from ranches. “The kids have a great work ethic,” said Gray, who upon arriving in Oacoma, joined the coaching staff at Chamberlain High School in Chamberlain, SD.

Oacoma is a 10 minute drive across the Missouri River to Chamberlain. Chamberlain”s population is 2,300. The school enrollment is 200. The school has one football team, 28 players total, comprised of freshmen through seniors.

“It”s very much like Pacifica. The support for the team is tremendous,” said Gray, in an email.

Gray was a winner at Terra Nova, leading the team to five consecutive league championships. Coming to Chamberlain, he picked up where he left off in our community. He coached Chamberlain”s wide receivers and defensive backs. The team played eight games, winning all four of its league games to win the conference championship.

“Away games are very long trips. We had two trips of four hours one way,” added Gray. The shortest trip was a little over an hour. We play against schools our own size. Despite the small size of the schools, all of the communities show great support for their high school athletic programs. There are great crowd wherever we play, especially at home. Fields are all magnificently groomed grass fields.”

The team advanced to the South Dakota State playoffs. In the first round, Chamberlain beat its regional opponent, Todd County, 42-16. In the quarterfinal, the team lost to powerhouse Madison, 61-0.Wow! That must have hurt!

For the playoff, if a team continues to win, it could play three games within a week span.

“South Dakota compresses the post season schedule in an attempt to brat the winter snows,” said Gray. “We”re waiting for winter to strike us hard.”

We wish Coach Gray the best as he get ready to settle in for a warm winter”s nap.

Championship in Louisiana

Jason Thomas, aka JT, was a three sport athlete at Terra Nova, graduating in 1992. Today, he lives in Lafayette, LA where he is still active in sports and a championship basketball coach.

At Terra Nova, Thomas was all-league in both football and basketball. He also ran track. His pass receiving helped bring Terra Nova a 1991 co-championship with Half Moon Bay. He caught the winning touchdown.

Over his four years he was named the team”s most valuable player and played on six championship teams.

After two years at College of San Mateo, he attended Grambling State University, where he majored in physical education. Following graduation in 1998 he stayed in Louisiana where he got a job coaching girls” basketball at a local high school. Later he moved to Carencro Middle School in Lafayette, where he”s been teaching P.E for the past eight years.

This year his football team won its second consecutive Parish football championship.

“We went undefeated both years, giving up only 24 points over the two-year span, while averaging 21 points a game,” said Thomas, who also coached the school to a basketball title. “I”ve always loved sports and working with kids, so after I quit playing sports I decided I wanted to coach.”

Jason parents now live in Las Vegas.