Mad Max (1979)

This write-up comes in the light of a handful of friends pestering me to go watch Mad Max: Fury Road (2015) and surely, by now, their patience is thinning. So I now move to assuage the tension by presenting George Miller’s Mad Max, starring Mel Gibson, Joanne Samuel, Hugh Keays-Byrne, Steve Bisley, Tim Burns, and Roger Ward, which was influenced by the tenor of American Westerns (particularly revisionist Westerns like 1952′s High Noon and after). But Miller’s efforts, with a A$350,000-400,000 budget (~$1,200,000-$1,360,000 in 2015′s USD) and a US$100 million gross (approximately $325 million in 2015′s USD – Mad Max was an international success yet became a box office failure in America), are singular, injecting action filmmaking with a much-needed low-budget shot in the leg after a decade-long glut of all-star disaster movies. Here, Gibson plays the famous renegade cop in an Australia wracked by the impact of the 1973 oil crisis and roving biker gangs.

In the prologue, we see Main Force Patrol (MFP) struggling to deal with two berserk bike gang members, one named Crawford “Nightrider” Montazano (Vincent Gil) and his unnamed partner-in-crime (Lulu Punkus). The MFP sends out Max Rockatansky (Gibson) to deal with the Nightrider’s dangerous free-wheeling out on the rural highways. Max drives the Nightrider into a game of chicken, leading to the Nightrider’s explosive death. Meanwhile, the Nightrider’s gang, led by Toecutter (Keays-Byrne; those who have seen the most recent Max should know he also played Immortan Joe) and Bubba Zanetti (Geoff Parry) – the ruffians rape, plunder precious petroleum, and kill those standing in their way. Max’s partner Jim “Goose” Rains (Bisley) is killed in a confrontation with The Acolytes, forcing Max to tender his resignation. The resignation is temporarily rejected, with Max’s boss Captain Fred “Fifi” Macaffee (Ward) allowing Max some time off before making a final decision. Max runs off to vacation with his wife Jessie (Samuel) and their baby boy Sprog (Brendan Heath). Yet The Acolytes are nearby, leading to Max’s conviction to deal death to those who have harmed those he cares for most.

Before becoming a film director, Miller worked as an emergency room doctor where he saw numerous vehicular injuries and deaths firsthand; he had also witnessed a number of car accidents and lost three friends to such accidents while growing up as a teenager. Mad Max presents an extremist version of rural Australia’s obsession with cars and motorcycles – an American equivalent to this emotional connection to an inanimate object is the United States’ firearm culture. But unlike a ragtag bunch of redneck, National Rifle Association (NRA) cardholding racial supremacists, Miller presents a culture in ferocious combat against OPEC’s oil embargo – quadrupling prices of petroleum worldwide. Australians would form lengthy queues in front of refilling stations; the frustration from those further back sometimes resulting in needless violence. The basis of Mad Max’s reality began to evolve in Miller’s mind. Along with producer Byron Kennedy, Miller was able to raise the money he needed to make the film (despite a meager budget, they were able to afford Gibson as he had only appeared in one film before 1979).

Senseless violence begets senseless violence. The brawls in front of gas stations were translated to Mad Max’s vehicular, seemingly unmotivated terror. The Australia seen in Mad Max – its desolation, the reason behind all of these psychotic biker gangs with no semblance of compassion, the brutal police force – is never explained. It is not even established whether this Australia is on the verge of the apocalypse, undergoing the apocalypse, or emerging from that cataclysm. If I were to harbor a guess and having not seen the second or third Mad Max films, I would say Mad Max is the pre-apocalypse where Mad Max: Fury Road – neither a sequel or reboot, rather a reimagining with no continuity with the original Gibson trilogy – is the post-apocalypse. Though Mad Max’s violence in and of itself is gratuitous, the level of violence serves to suggest that if you’re looking for unscrupulous individuals who maintain order by selflessly tending to the civilian populations, Miller’s take on this oil-parched Australia is incapable of yielding any such ideal heroes. The grassy flatness of the landscape democratizes the frame just as much as the amorality between the biker gangs and MFP has leveled the ethical playing fields. Max’s superiors would never admit this, of course, as they assume – and perhaps rightfully – that the enemy they face is not interested in existing in a reality of law and order.

Similar in spirit to Fred Zinnemann’s High Noon in that the protagonist must take matters into his own hands due to the incompetence of others against a villain whose prior motivations and actions are not specified, Mel Gibson is no Gary Cooper. Max Rockatansky is no Will Kane. Max, as long as his family is unharmed, cares minimally about the local population he is sworn to protect. He takes no extra measures to ensure others’ safety when The Acolytes are rampaging towards him intending to kill him and his entire family for no reason other than the pleasure of inflicting violence. The disintegration of a state-held monopoly of violence is imminent. Considering that there are sequels, one senses that tactics used by the MFP – especially by Max – is all but a Hail Mary against hordes of intrastate groups intending to establish their more anarchical worldviews.

Some dodgy editing by Cliff Hayes and Tony Paterson and suspect writing by James McCausland and Miller deprives the cast of characters – more so Max and Jessie rather than the mercilessly eccentric, outstretched-tongued villains – of much development and dimension. Though Hayes and Paterson’s editing is a boon for the many action sequences with its sensical rapid-fire cutting, they seem too eager to return to the country roads as too many connecting scenes are dropped from the film. These missing scenes could have assisted with characterization, especially due to the fact that – spoilers – Jessie is essentially fridged to explain Max’s motivation for revenge against The Acolytes. Miller and McCausland’s characters are too simplistic, too elementary (Brian May’s shameless action score is poorly placed and sucks any drama out of non-action scenes) in a pre-apocalyptic world that they have presented with a restrained complexity.

However, the one takeaway from the original Mad Max are its breakneck action scenes that make it one of the most heart-racing action films of the 1970s. The spatial continuity seen in Mad Max is almost unseen in today’s action films; the speed of the cars and the sound of the engines working away can be frightening. The V-8 Interceptors seen in the film (a modified 1973 Ford Falcon XB GT – I looked it up as I know very little about cars) are the stars of the film, zooming gracefully through these empty rural roads. The stunt behind the Nightrider’s death saw the Nightrider’s vehicle equipped with a military booster rocket; upon its initiation, the car hurtled towards cinematographer David Eggby’s camera at 150 mph/241 kph, barely missing, spinning 180 degrees (seen briefly before it explodes), and not stopping until hit a ditch about a half-mile from where it was supposed to stop. With Eggby and his camera fractions away from being cinematic and literal roadkill, the dangerous stunt would not be repeated as – through the film’s rushes – did Eggby and Miller realize the death-defying scene was shot to perfection. It would not be the only time for Eggby.

Somehow, with a bare-bones budget for a major studio project, Mad Max was crafted into being. The original Max is a solid, albeit flawed in its editing and writing, action experience forsaking production decisions that would have assured everyone’s safety. Distributed in the United States by the terminally ill American International Pictures (best known for its low-budget teen movies from the 1950s-70s, especially the Beach Party series with Frankie Avalon and Annette Funicello), the original Mad Max remains underseen stateside and has only had a limited cultural impact in the U.S. Though it has become a hit everywhere else but America, the release of Mad Max: Fury Road may just inspire some to seek out the origins of Miller’s dystopia. At times viciously exciting, at times frustrating, and always fascinating to watch, the desolation of the original Mad Max will remains a chilling one-and-a-half hours in all its bloodlust.

My rating: 7.5/10