Mad Max (1979). Directed by George Miller. Screenplay by James McCausland and George Miller. Music by Brian May. Starring Mel Gibson, Joanne Samuel, Hugh Keays-Byrne, Steve Bisley and Tim Burns as “Johnny the Boy.”

By Stephen Pytak

Recently a critic on YouTube suggested newcomers to the Mad Max series skip the original and go straight to the sequel, Mad Max 2 a.k.a. The Road Warrior (1981).

Not sure I agree with that.

While I enjoy all the films in the series, the first one is a stand out. There’s nothing like it. And it’s hard to forget the first 10 minutes of Mad Max (1979) after you’ve seen it. It’s a shock to the system, just as powerful as the clap of bone against neanderthal skull in the opening of 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968).

Mad Max (1979) is the only entry the series which appears to take place in a society which isn’t a wasteland. It gives us the character’s origin story. And, of course, it gives us the best-looking Interceptor V8 Pursuit Special in the canon.

Whenever I see the sequels, images of part one always flash in my mind, even when I saw Tom Hardy in the role in Max Max: Fury Road (2015).

After Mad Max (1979), the films in the series basically became “Man With No Name” movies. And that’s how “Dr. Dealgood” refers to “Max” in Mad Max: Beyond Thunderdome (1985).

As I watched Mad Max (1979) on a big screen in Philadelphia on July 28, 1979, I admired how well it was put together and thought about my experiences watching it over the years.

I first saw it on Home Box Office (HBO) in 1980 or 1981. I think I was 10 at the time.

The opening credits pop onto the screen with aggressive music by Brian May. Then we’re told that what we’re about to see will occur “a few years from now…”

A lot of people refer to Mad Max (1979) as a post-apocalyptic film, but I think that’s open for discussion. Society here is falling apart. The reasons why aren’t completely clear. There’s a few indications that something happened to throw things out of whack. In the last act, we see a sign with a skull and crossbones on it and the words “STOP, PROHIBITED AREA.” I’m not sure what that means exactly. But whatever’s going on, a poor economy has given rise to all sorts of desperation.

Here the police drive race cars to keep up with the outlaw biker gangs that stalk the outback like pirates. The bikers hate the cops, but love their cars. And at the start of the film, we meet a crazy who calls himself “The Nightrider.” And he’s causing chaos in one he stole, a black V8 Pursuit Special.

In 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), we learn a bit about the kinds of weapons mankind uses over time. In Mad Max (1979), the weapons of choice are suped-up vehicles. And in this opening scene, we find out how battles on the highway are fought.

It helps if you’re crazy.

As “The Nightrider,” actor Vincent Gil taunts the cops on the radio, preaching at the top of his lungs about his invulnerability and his plan for a better tomorrow.

“Step right up, chum, and watch the kid lay down the rubber road, ride to freedom!”

He wants a reputation. See, the bikers in this world want to be known for one thing or another. “The Nightrider” talks highly about “The Toecutter,” and later in the film “The Toecutter” will talk highly about “The Nightrider.” And “Johnny the Boy” will try to talk highly about “The Nightrider,” but he forgets all the great things he’s suppose to say about him.

After eluding two police cruisers and a police motorcycle, “The Nightrider” runs into someone else with a reputation, the guy in the fourth police vehicle which arrives on scene.

“Max Rockatansky (Mel Gibson)” is a young cop who knows how to deal with road scum quickly and effectively. He’s driving a blue and yellow Ford Falcon XB. And with lights and sirens blaring, he rolls up to the bumper of the stolen interceptor and nudges it again and again.

This continues for a bit. And “The Nightrider” finds himself face to face with something he didn’t expect. He has nowhere to go. He can’t escape it. Unsure what else to do, he cries.

Distracted, he doesn’t see a flagman in the road until it’s too late. He hits his breaks, but is unable to avoid barrels of fuel in the road.

Then, we see the face of the cop who broke his spirit. He’s young, boyish. This is “Max Rockatansky,” a driver with talent facing an uncertain future.

When we meet “Max ” at the start of the film, he’s not “Mad Max.” He’s a somewhat level-headed guy with a wife and an infant son. He has a tough job. His wife worries about him. The violence he’s exposed to day-in and day-out plays on his mind. And he’s struggling to keep it together. He’s threatened to quit the force a time or two, but has been lured back for one reason or another.

His immediate supervisor, “Fifi (Roger Ward),” says that the bikers are out to get him.

“Max” doesn’t seem too concerned. He seems pretty confident he can deal with “The Toecutter (Hugh Keays-Byrne)” and “Johnny the Boy (Tim Burns)” while on patrol.

But “The Toecutter” and his gang have a talent for infecting neighborhoods with the kind of terror and tragedy that would fascinate not only Shakespeare, but the baddies from The Last House On The Left (1972). The film’s director, George Miller, delivers all that with great character-driven moments, nail-biting suspense and incredibly well-edited shocks.

One thing leads to another, then another, then the introduction of our title character. And when “Mad Max” steals “the last of the V8s” to settle the score, the audience is right there with him.

Like Death Wish (1974) and Rolling Thunder (1977), Mad Max (1979) is one of the greatest revenge films of all time. And one of the reasons why is that last act, which is breathtaking.

I remember when The Road Warrior (1981) played at the United Artists theater at the Schuylkill Mall in Frackville, Pa. on its initial release. I went not knowing what it was. And I was surprised by the opening narration and some of the clips which played over it.

I leaned over to my father and said “Hey, this is Mad Max 2!” The first film gave me some idea of what was to come. I knew the car chases would be crazy. I knew the characters would be too. I knew the main character and I knew where his he got his ride.

So, sure, I highly recommend seeing the first film, whether you’ve already seen the sequels or not. If you can see it on a big screen, go for it.

On July 28, 2017, I saw it at the Philadelphia Mausoleum of Contemporary Art (PhilaMOCA). The sound was turned down. The subtitles were turned on. And a six-member band from New York City called Morricone Youth played a new score over it.

I have no problem with Brian May’s score. It’s powerful stuff.

But it’s fun to hear a new take. And Morricone Youth did something special here.

The band came up with some stuff I never expected, like a playful theme for the baddies. On the band’s album, “Morricone Youth – Mad Max,” released in January 2017, you can hear it in a track called “Clunes Town.” It’s also in “Anarchie Road.” It’s fun, somewhat comedic.

When Brian May originally scored the film, he didn’t include anything like that. If I remember correctly, most of his score was made up of hard-driving action music, aside from a light melody here or there related to “Max” and his wife, “Jesse (Joanne Samuel).” And that’s fine. If he had strayed too far from what he had in his mind, Mad Max (1979) may not have had the aural power which helped make it a classic in the first place.

But some of those light-hearted melodies from Morricone Youth will bring a smile to your face. They played them when “The Toecutter” and his buddies rolled into that ghost town to pick up the remains of “The Nightrider.” I wonder what Hugh Keays-Byrne would have thought of it.

Of course, the band also laid down some great driving action music to match the chase scenes. Hearing the rumble of the drums and the crash of cymbals as I watched the MFP roar across the screen was really something.

“Mad Goose” is a great track. So is “Nightrider.”

The band that night in Philadelphia featured: Devon E. Levins, the founder of the band, on guitars; John Castro, bass/vocals; Dan Kessler, keyboards; Fraser Campbell, keyboards/saxophone; Brian Kantor, drums; and Sami Stevens, vocals.

Once the film started, the band played right through to the end credits.

There’s a scene in the film where “Goose (Steve Bisley)” goes to a club to listen to a singer, Robina Chaffey. She performs a song called “Licorice Road.” According to IMDb, the singer is actually Creenagh St. Clair. It was never released as a single as far as I know.

Anyway, when that scene rolled up onto the screen at PhilaMOCA, Sami Stevens performed the vocals.

It was interesting, really cool. It was like we were in that bar and the scene came to life.

Fans of the film should really visit their website at morriconeyouth.com and try to catch this show.

My rating here is for the film, Mad Max (1979) in both its original form and its dubbed version, and for the July 28, 2017 performance by Morricone Youth at PhilaMOCA.