The cast of the original Mad Max reunited at the Supernova festival in Sydney on Friday, 40 years after the iconic film was first released.

Most of the main cast was in attendance, with Joanne Samuel, Steve Bisley, Hugh Keays-Byrne, Tim Burns, Paul Johnstone and Roger Ward all taking a seat onstage for a panel discussion at the fan convention.

Not present was the film's main star, Mel Gibson, but his absence didn't appear to put a dampener on the mood.

The cult classic was first released in April 1979, and was made on a budget of less than $400,000.

But the Melbourne-shot film went on to become one of the highest grossing movies of all time, raking in US$100 million at the international box office.

It even held the Guinness World Record for most profitable film for nearly 20 years.

The movie has been credited with launching Mel Gibson's stellar career, but the Oscar-winning star never intended on auditioning for the film.

The 63-year-old actor was a student at the National Institute of Dramatic Arts and was living with Steve Bisley at the time.

After a wild night out the previous evening, Mel had apparently ended up in a fight, before driving Steve, 67, to his audition the following morning.

His roughed up face caught the attention of the casting directors, who were searching for actors to portray the gritty role of Max in the dystopian fantasy film.

In an interview with Supernova back in April, Steve admitted no one could have predicted the massive success of the film.

'We knew it was different, we knew it was sort of special, but nobody had any idea about what it would become over the years,' he confessed.

The movie went on to spawn a successful franchise, with two more films, Mad Max 2 in 1981, and Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome in 1985.

It also launched a remake in 2015, Mad Max: Fury Road, with Tom Hardy stepping into the role of Max.

In a May 2015 interview with the BBC, the 41-year-old British actor admitted he was nervous about taking over such an iconic role.

'When I got the part I was suddenly stuck with the thought, "Oh no, everyone loves Mel. I'm the new kid and they are going to hate me. I suck already and I haven't even started,"' he confessed.

But Tom said he soon came to realise that director George Miller, 74, who was also behind the original, would never have entrusted him with the role if he didn't think he was up to the task.

'I've just inherited the legacy and it's my job to just turn up and do as he asks, so the pressure comes off,' he added.