CHARLES DEAN RAY, AB, MS, MD, FACS, FRSH (Lond.)

August 1, 1927 – July 21, 2011

Charles D. Ray, M.D. died peacefully in his sleep July 21, 2011 in Santa Barbara, California at the age of 84. He is survived by his daughter Marlene Ray, of Santa Barbara and by his son, Bruce Charles Ray, of Minneapolis.

Born in Americus, Georgia on August 1, 1927 to the late Oliver Tinsley Ray and Katherine Broadfield Ray, Charles Ray went on to live an amazing life.

Co-founder of North American Spine Society, founding President of Spine Arthroplasty Society. Founder of both the American College of Spine Surgery and the American Board of Spine Surgery. Distinguished Alumnus in 1994 by his Alma Mater, The Medical College of Georgia. Dr. Ray is the holder of 53 U.S. patents and over 100 foreign patents, over 365 articles and books and his bibliography lists 340 entries. Gold Winner of the Medical Design Excellence Award for the year 2000. Emory University, University of Miami, Medical College of Georgia, Mayo Clinic, Assistant Professor of Neurosurgery Johns Hopkins University and Bioengineering. Hoffman-LaRoche in Basal, Switzerland, head of Medical Research Division of Medtronic, Inc. in Minneapolis, MN. Other appointments included the Institute for Low Back & Neck Care in Minneapolis; the medical staff of Sentara Hospitals, Norfolk, Virginia; Chairman Emeritus and Medical Director of RayMedica; Chairman and Medical Director of InveRay, Ltd.

Preceding Dr. Ray in death are his wife, Christie; daughter, Kathy Lynn Ray; and son, Thomas Ross Ray; as well as his sister, Katherine Olivia Ray Jones. Those left to cherish and honor his memory include Marlene and Bruce, as well as Rod Pearson and two grandchildren, Ross Micheal Pearson and Nancy Rose Pearson of Santa Barbara; brother and sister-in-law, Thomas Broadfield Ray and Jean Bodin Ray of Atlanta; and numerous additional family members.

Memorial service Sunday July 31, 2pm Valle Verde Retirement Community, 900 Calle de Los Amigos, Community Room. In lieu of flowers donations can be made to Phoenix House of Santa Barbara.