Easily one of the most well known rockers on the Planet, musician Bryan Adams is a busy man. After all, the Grammy-winning singer-songwriter has sold more than 65 albums worldwide, garnered 21 Top 10 hits and seven No. 1 hits. Adams is also a celebrated photographer, magazine publisher and bona fide philanthropist, raising funds to better the lives of disadvantaged individuals all over the world.

Born Bryan Guy Adams on Nov. 5, 1959 in Kingston, Ontario, Adams is the top-selling Canadian artist of all time with a career stretching nearly four decades. He achieved stardom in the mid-1980s with the release of his fourth studio album, "Reckless," which spawned singles such as "Run to You," "Somebody" and "Summer of '69." In celebration of the 30th anniversary of the record, Adams is on a world tour titled "Reckless," which makes a stop at the St. Augustine Amphitheatre on Sunday.

Compass caught up with Adams via email for a short interview about his tour, the upcoming album and what kind of music he grew up around. Here's that conversation.

Compass: How has the Reckless 30th Anniversary Tour been going?

Bryan Adams: Rather well, if the truth be told. It was a lot of fun to put together, and even more fun as we come into the final stretch of it. We will have celebrated it almost as long as we toured in 1984/85!

Compass: Tell me about the set list you're performing on this tour.

B.A.: It's the entire album, plus a few songs that are on the re-release of the album, which are called bonus tracks.

Compass: What kind of music did you listen to growing up? Were you raised in a musical household?

B.A.: Oh, yes, a very musical household. I was woken regularly by my father to the sounds of The Black Watch, a Scottish military bagpipe outfit, and opera. I rebelled with Deep Purple, Led Zeppelin, The Who, Black Sabbath and The Beatles.

Compass: I read that you're set to release a new studio album in the fall. What can you tell me about it?

B.A.: It's my 13th album of music and probably my most rocking record by far. It's been produced by Jeff Lynne and co-written with my long-time buddy Jim Vallance, who wrote "Reckless" with me.

Compass: Is it titled yet?

B.A.: Yes, but I have to keep it secret for another couple of weeks.

Compass: The Bryan Adams Foundation has helped children all over the world. How important is giving back?

B.A.: Being involved in philanthropy comes with the territory as a public figure. I started the foundation to focus on things close to my heart.

Compass: Do you feel that anyone with a platform should spend energy giving back?

B.A.: Yes.

Bryan Adams will perform at 8 p.m. Sunday at the St. Augustine Amphitheatre. Gates open at 6:30 p.m.

Tickets are $30-$85.

Did you know?

Here are some fun and interesting tidbits you probably didn't know about Bryan Adams:

n He's been nominated or won every entertainment award in the United States, Canada and England (including Oscar nominations).

n He is a celebrated photographer in both fashion editorial and exhibits across the globe, as well as permanent selections in the National Portrait Gallery.

n His songs have been covered on every top-rated national TV competition show on three continents and by his contemporaries including Taylor Swift, Carrie Underwood and Jason Aldean.

n In March 2011, he was presented with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

n He performed at the opening ceremony of the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver with Nelly Furtado.

n Combined, he has more than 100 million views on YouTube.

n His music has appeared on more than 40 movie soundtracks.

n In 2006, he became the first western artist to perform in Pakistan. The concert in Karachi was to raise funds to rebuild schools that were devastated by an earthquake.

Top 5: Bryan Adams playlist

1. (Everything I Do) I Do It For You, 1991

2. Have You Ever Really Loved a Woman?, 1995

3. Summer of '69, 1985

4. All for Love, 1993

5. Run to You, 1984