He's a favourite through the generations!

Bryan Adams, affectionately known as the ‘Groover From Vancouver’, brings a melodic sensibility to rock music and in the process has garnered a huge crossover audience that’s made pop music a better place.

With a massive 15 studio albums under his belt, from his 1980 debut album to his 2022 'So Happy It Hurts' record, and countless Top 10 hits, Bryan Adams is a sure favourite. We've taken a look back at his life and career, and answered some burning questions about him...

Who is Bryan Adams?

Bryan Adams was born on 5th November 1959, in Kingston, Ontario in Canada, making him currently 64-years-old. His parents, Elizabeth and Captain Conrad Adams, emigrated to Canada in the 50s.

Thanks to his military career, Bryan’s father became a United Nations peacekeeping observer for Canada before becoming a foreign service diplomat for his adopted homeland.

Consequently, young Bryan travelled with his parents to Portugal and Austria during the 60s and Israel in the 70s. Bryan moved to Vancouver with his mother and younger brother Bruce in 1974.

Bryan Adams: Early career

Having started working in a recording studio in Vancouver in the mid-70s, Bryan Adams joined local glam rock band Sweeney Todd. The band scored a few minor hits in Canada, but Bryan left less than a year after joining the band.

In 1978, Bryan met drummer and songwriter Jim Vallance and the pair struck a successful partnership that exists to this very day.

WATCH: Bryan Adams - 'Summer Of '69'

How successful was Bryan Adams in the 80s?

Signed to A & M Records, Bryan Adams recorded his first three albums – ‘Bryan Adams’, ‘You Want It You Got It’ and ‘Cuts Like A Knife’ – between 1980 and 1983. The first two albums were minor successes in Canada but did little beyond North America. Peaking at Number 21 in the UK album charts, ‘Cuts Like A Knife’ gave a tantalising glimpse of what was to come.

He finally broke through to a global audience with his fourth album, ‘Reckless’. Going on to sell around 12 million copies worldwide, Bryan was propelled to chart success thanks to a run of singles that raised his profile. These included ‘Summer Of ‘69’, ‘Heaven’ and the ever-popular ‘Run To You’.

WATCH: Bryan Adams - 'Heaven'

His fame increased after touring Europe with Tina Turner. Bryan paid tribute to her in May 2023 after her death at the age of 83, sharing a throwback photo of the pair of them alongside the caption: 'RIP my dear tinaturner I'll be forever grateful for you bringing me on tour, going in the studio together and most of all, being your friend.

'Thank you for being the inspiration to millions of people around the world for speaking your truth and giving us the gift of your unbelievable voice. My condolences to Erwin and your family. It's Only Love...and that's all. ❤️'

Breaking UK chart records

He certainly did – and not just in the UK when, in 1991, ‘(Everything I Do) I Do It For You’ took up residency at the top of the singles charts the world over. The single was written after Bryan was invited to contribute a song to the Kevin Costner-starred film ‘Robin Hood: Prince Of Thieves’.

With a video directed by Julien Temple and shot in Sheffield, ‘(Everything I Do) I Do It For You’ soon began to climb the charts all over the world. Hitting the top spot in over a dozen countries including Australia, New Zealand, Italy, Norway and Spain, its biggest success was in the UK, US and Canada.

WATCH: Bryan Adams - '(Everything I Do) I Do It For You'

Spending seven weeks at Number 1 in the US and nine weeks in the Canadian charts, the single’s biggest success was in the UK where it spent a staggering 16 weeks in pole position. An unbroken UK chart record, this is the longest run at Number 1 in the UK singles charts.

Selling 15 million copies, Bryan - along with co-writers Michael Kamen and Robert John ‘Mutt’ Lange - won a GRAMMY Award for Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television. Other nominations included the GRAMMY Award for Record of the Year, and an Academy Award for Best Song.

There’s a wry chuckle to be raised knowing that the follow-up single was called ‘Can’t Stop This Thing We Started’. Ironically, it did by peaking at Number 2.

Which are the best Bryan Adams songs?

Bryan Adam's song 'Everything I Do' will no doubt always be his most popular song. But when it comes to which Bryan Adams songs are actually the best, it's fairly subjective. 'Heaven', 'Summer of 69', 'Run To You' and 'Please Forgive Me' seem to constantly make it onto top lists of his best songs, but perhaps the best Bryan Adams songs are yet to come!

WATCH: Bryan Adams - 'Please Forgive Me'

Has Bryan Adams done any duets, collaborations or film soundtracks?

Bryan is certainly not one to keep things to himself. Teaming up with Rod Stewart and former Police frontman Sting, the trio scored a global hit with ‘All For Love’, which was taken from the Charlie Sheen and Kiefer Sutherland version of ‘The Three Musketeers’.

Along with '(Everything I Do) I Do It For You', Bryan's single ‘Have You Ever Loved A Woman’ was taken from film ‘Don Juan DeMarco’, starring Johnny Depp and Marlon Brando, while the duet with Barbra Streisand, ‘I Finally Found Somebody’ featured in her movie, ‘The Mirror Has Two Faces’.

Dance producer Chicane also hooked up Bryan Adams for the 2000 UK Number 1 single, ‘Don’t Give Up’.

Bryan Adams also scored hits with Tina Turner (‘It’s Only Love’), blues singer-guitarist Bonnie Raitt on ‘Rock Steady’ and ‘When You’re Gone’ with Sporty Spice - Melanie C. He also recorded another version of the song with fellow Canadian and Baywatch star Pamela Anderson in 2006.

WATCH: Bryan Adams and Mel C - ‘When You’re Gone’

Bryan and Mel C re-recorded their hit in 2022 and released a new video for it. The video was filmed in one continuous shot and filmed in Mel's home town of Widnes.

He has also written music for the musical adaption of the iconic 90s film Pretty Woman, which ran on Broadway in 2018 and in the West End in February 2020. Bryan later released new versions of the soundtrack to his YouTube channel to the delight of fans.

Bryan Adams - 'You And I' (from Pretty Woman: The Musical)

Is Bryan Adam making a film?

A film by Bryan Adams could be on the cards, as he revealed that he would like to get into filmmaking as either a cinematographer or a director.

Bryan Adams and Bon Jovi tour 2020

To celebrate the release of a brand new Bon Jovi album, Bryan was set to tour with the band in Summer 2020. Unfortunately, the dates were completely cancelled. Bon Jovi announced the news on social media, writing: 'Due to the ongoing global pandemic, it is no longer feasible for Bon Jovi to tour this summer.

'Given these difficult times, we have made the decision to cancel the tour entirely. This will enable ticketholders to get refunds to help pay their bills or buy groceries. These are trying times. You’ve always been there for us and we’ll always be there for you.

'We look forward to seeing everyone again on tour when we can all safely be together. We will continue to send out news and updates on Bon Jovi touring in the weeks and months to come.'

Did Bryan Adams tour the UK in 2021?

Unfortunately, the global pandemic stopped some of Bryan's 2020 gigs, and he announced rescheduled dates on Instagram, writing: 'To everyone who has tickets to the Shine A Light tour, due to the government's shut down of all live events, we have rescheduled our shows to 2021.

'Staying healthy is the number one priority and I’m looking forward to rocking out with you as soon as possible. Go to bryanadams.com/tour (link in the bio) for the latest updates. Stay safe, Bryan X.'

Thankfully, Bryan was able to visit the UK for his 'So Happy It Hurts' Tour, which took place in May and July 2022, and was named after his 15th studio album, released in March 2022.

'So Happy It Hurts' album

Ahead of the release of his 'So Happy It Hurts' album in March 2022, Bryan Adams released his song 'So Happy It Hurts' and its accompanying music video in October 2021, as well as his songs 'Kick A--' and 'On The Road' which came out in December 2021.

Watch 'So Happy It Hurts' by Bryan Adams:

'So Happy It Hurts (Super Deluxe)' album

As well as releasing the original album in March, Bryan followed this up with a 'So Happy It Hurts (Super Deluxe)' version, which also includes a CD of 12 re-recorded versions of his greatest hits.

Released on 28th October, it includes iconic tracks like 'Summer of '69', 'Run to You' and 'Please Forgive Me'.

Bryan Adams: New music in 2023

In September 2023, Bryan released two songs called 'You're Awesome' and 'Sometimes You Lose Before You Win'. He told his fans that these songs feature in the Comedy Central film Office Race.

In 2022, Bryan released new music videos for his re-recorded songs, including 'I Ain't Worth S--- Without You' which was filmed at the Royal Albert Hall in London, 'When You're Gone' with Spice Girls Mel C, which was filmed in her hometown of Widnes, and 'When You Love Someone' which was filmed in Floors Castle in Scotland.

Watch 'When You Love Someone (Classic Version)' by Bryan Adams:

Bryan Adams' live album 'Live At The Royal Albert Hall'

Bryan Adams has announced he will be releasing a live album called 'Live At The Royal Albert Hall', which includes all three nights of his 2022 performances. At each gig he performed one of his classic albums in their entirety, 'Cuts Like A Knife' (Night One), 'Into The Fire' (Night Two) and 'Waking Up The Neighbours' (Night Three).

Where does Bryan Adams live?

When he's not staying in fancy hotels touring the world, Bryan Adams has a choice of homes to live in but he has previously called the UK his "home from home".

Is Bryan Adams married?

Bryan was rumoured to have married his former personal assistant, Alicia Grimaldi, in 2009, but many publications he has never married.

Does Bryan Adams have a child?

Bryan Adams has two children with Alicia Grimaldi. They welcomed their first daughter Bunny in 2011 and second Lula Rosylea in February 2013.

Is Bryan Adams vegan?

He is! Bryan Adams has been a vocal and active vegan for over 30 years and even reckons his youthful looks are down to his strict vegan diet. He told Vegan Life Magazine in 2016: "For those people who aren't veggie or vegan it was the best gift I could ever give myself to do it.

"I am turning 57 years old this year and I work hard, I am always on the move but I have tons of energy because I am plant-based. It is absolutely the best thing you could ever do for yourself. It is a great path."

Bryan Adams as a photographer

Bryan Adams is a recognised and award-winning photographer who worked on the 2022 Pirelli calendar, where he took photos of a number of big names. He named the calendar On the Road - and with photos of Rita Ora, Cher, Grimes, Iggy Pop, Normani, St Vincent and Jennifer Hudson in urban spaces, he captured the life of an artist on tour.

Bryan has worked with numerous celebrities on a variety of photography projects over the years including Take That, Shania Twain, Rod Stewart, Celine Dion, Amy Winehouse, and Annie Lennox. His work has also been featured in a number of campaigns and magazines including British Vogue,

Check out these legendary artists then and now:

You can hear the biggest songs from Bryan Adams on Greatest Hits Radio.

Now read:

Bryan Adams releases new album 'So Happy It Hurts'

Bryan Adams wants to expand his career into filmmaking

Bon Jovi through the years: How the rock band have changed over time

How to listen to Greatest Hits Radio:

Listen to Greatest Hits Radio on the free Rayo app, online or on your DAB digital radio. You can also listen on your smart speaker by saying “Play Greatest Hits Radio”.