It's on TV this festive period

Legendary Slade vocalist and guitarist Noddy Holder will sit in the subject’s chair on an upcoming Portrait Artist of the Year Christmas Special.

Set to air on Sky Arts this coming festive period, the Portrait Artist of the Year Christmas Special will see celebrity contestants draw portraits of Noddy Holder and other famous faces including designer Lawrence Llewelyn-Bowen and singer Mica Paris.

‘Six celebrities take on a festive challenge to paint one of three well-known sitters with a little help from some wise mystery guests,' writes Sky Arts.

‘While there’s celebration in the air, as always, the art is created under the watchful eyes of our discerning judges – award-winning artist Tai Shan Schierenberg, independent curator Kathleen Soriano and art historian Kate Bryan.’

Unveiling a raft of special Christmas shows on Sky Arts, director Phil Edgar-Jones enthuses: “We love Christmas at Sky Arts and this year we’re bringing some Christmas cheer direct to your telly for free.

“With our favourite carols, a soupçon of swing, Christmas stories and paintings unpacked, and the one and only Noddy Holder sitting for a special festive portrait, iiiit’s Christmas! We can’t guarantee snow but we can promise warmth, nostalgia and a stocking full of fun.”

When is the Portrait Artist of the Year Christmas Special?

The exact date and time for the programme to air has not yet been announced, however it will be shown between 17th and 30th December 2022.

Last year, Pink Floyd drummer and Nick Mason’s Saucerful of Secrets lynchpin, Nick Mason, was the celebrity the eight semi-finalists had to draw in the eighth series of Portrait Artist of the Year.

Noddy rose to fame as part of rock band Slade, and the group's ubiquitous festive hit ‘Merry Xmas Everybody’ is being released on limited edition 12” coloured vinyl on Friday 25th November.

BMG Records have also continued their new series of limited edition vinyl reissues and deluxe CDs from Slade, with the recent release of ‘Crackers - The Christmas Party Album.’

‘Crackers - The Christmas Party Album’ is available on limited edition transparent and smoky white vinyl with 16 songs, while the CD will contain four bonus tracks.

Check out these amazing artists then and now:

Now read:

Slade unveil the first ever official video for 'Merry Xmas Everybody'

Previously unseen photos of David Bowie and Freddie Mercury feature in new online exhibition

Queen share music video for 'Face It Alone'

How to listen to Greatest Hits Radio:

Listen to Greatest Hits Radio on the free Rayo app, online or on your DAB digital radio. You can also listen on your smart speaker by saying “Play Greatest Hits Radio”.