About Christmas Records Trust

A Very Special Christmas was founded by legendary record producer Jimmy Iovine, his then-wife Vicki and Bobby Shriver, son of Special Olympics Founder Eunice Shriver. Originally conceived as a way to pay tribute to Iovine’s late father, the idea quickly evolved to include Special Olympics athletes as the beneficiaries.

Since then, ten more A Very Special Christmas albums have been released. In 1997, the Christmas Records Trust was established to manage and distribute assets generated by A Very Special Christmas sales. The Trust, overseen by Chairman Joseph Hakim and Trustees Vicki Iovine, Ossie Kilkenny, Brian Philips, and Bobby Shriver, generated over 3 million dollars in direct support Special Olympics Programs and athletes in 2013.

Clad in Santa Claus hats, Eunice Kennedy Shriver and Special Olympics athletes pose for a promotional photo with the founders of A Very Special Christmas - Jimmy and Vicki Iovine and Eunice's son, Bobby Shriver . Through the years, sales of A Very Special Christmas music albums have benefited Special Olympics programs around the world.

Iconic symbol of A Very Special Christmas was created by Keith Haring.

Creators and founders of A Very Special Christmas, left to right: Gil Friesen, Paul Marshall, Jerry Moss, Herb Alpert, Vicki Iovine, Jimmy Iovine and Eunice's son, Bobby, pose with Eunice and her husband Sargent Shriver following their receipt of the Spirit of Special Olympics Medal - the highest award presented by the Special Olympics movement.

Jimmy Iovine holds up the first A Very Special Christmas album with many of the album's artists including John Cougar Mellencamp, Run DMC, Annie Lennox, Bruce Springsteen and Bono.

Madonna poses with Special Olympics athletes for a promotional photo for the first A Very Special Christmas album on which she performs "Santa Baby."

Randy Travis joins Special Olympics athletes at A Very Special Christmas party in 1988.

Artists of A Very Special Christmas 3, top row: Adrian Young, Gabrial McNair, Dave Matthews and John Popper; middle row: Steven Bradley, Tony Kanal, Sheryl Crow, Sting and Gwen Stefani; bottom row: Justine Simmons and Reverend Run.

Artists of A Very Special Christmas 3 get in the holiday spirit with Ronald Perelman.

Jazz to the World includes many instrumental tracks from contemporary jazz artists, and vocalists who make the album memorable.

In 1998, U.S. President Bill Clinton and Mrs. Clinton hosted the A Very Special Christmas concert at The White House in Washington, DC.

Vanessa Williams performs "What Child is This," in the show, A Very Special Christmas in 1998.

Especially composed and written by Stevie Wonder for A Very Special Christmas, Stevie Wonder performs "I Love You More," at A Very Special Christmas in Washington in 2000.

Tom Petty performs "Little Red Rooster" at A Very Special Christmas in Washington in 2000.

"Please Come home for Christmas," is performed by longtime Special Olympics supporter Jon Bon Jovi at A Very Special Christmas in Washington in 1998.

Special Olympics athletes in Afghanistan line up for a race. Afghanistan is among the many developing countries around the world who have directly benefited from grants provided by the A Very Special Christmas Trust.