TCO and Geestar Empire announce RnB Xmas Ball, their first ever Xmas RnB festival on Sunday 17th December at OVO Arena Wembley, with a heavyweight lineup of international RnB legend headliners including Joe, Monica and SWV, alongside 112, Next, Bobby V and J Holiday.

International RnB superstars Joe, Monica and SWV will all be performing with full bands and the show will see Monica’s long-awaited return to grace the British stage for the first time in 30 years. With old skool ‘90s RnB peaking in influence and popularity across generations, the RnB Xmas Ball promises to be a sell-out show when tickets go on pre-sale 27th September and general sale on 29th September, bringing the heat to the legions of London fans this Christmas.

Multi-platinum selling artist Joe will be performing his most loved hits for his fans including ‘Stutter’, ‘All The Things (Your Man Won’t Do)’ and ‘Don’t Wanna Be A Player’. Award-winning and multi-million-selling singer, rapper and actress Monica has become an internationally adored figure and will bring her characteristically husky, soulful vocals with her hits ‘Before You Walk Out of My Life’, ‘Don't Take It Personal (Just One of Dem Days)’, ‘Like This and Like That’, ‘The Boy Is Mine’ (with Brandy), ‘The First Night’, ‘Angel of Mine’, ‘So Gone’, and "Everything to Me’. Meanwhile, iconic 90s vocal trio SWV (aka Sisters With Voices), consisting of Cheryl ‘Coko’ Gamble, Tamara ‘Taj’ Johnson, and Leanne ‘Lelee’ Lyons, have sold over 25million records globally, making them one of the most successful R&B groups of the 1990s. So it will be a rare treat for London fans to see SWV perform their timeless string of hits, including ‘Weak’, ‘Right Here (Human Nature Remix)’, ‘I’m So Into You’, and ‘You’re The One’.

Joe said “London always shows me the most love and I can’t wait to get on stage to perform live, y’all show me so much love and the vibe is so cool to connect with my UK fans again!”

Monica said “It will be amazing to return for the first time in 30 years for the RnB Xmas Ball, it feels so right to spend Christmas with you London, I’m not gonna leave it so long next time!”

SWV said “We are all so incredibly excited to come back to London for the RnB Xmas Ball, we’re gonna light it up. Are y’all ready for the RnB Xmas Ball?”