Maksim Chmerkovskiy: Wiki, Bio, Age, Wife, Net Worth, Height, Girlfriend, Siblings, Dancer, Big Brother, Twitter: Maksim “Maks” Aleksandrovich Chmerkovskiy (born January 17, 1980) is a choreographer, educator, and Latin–ballroom dance champion from Ukraine. He rose to prominence as one of the professional dancers on the American television show Dancing with the Stars, where he debuted in season two. Chmerkovskiy made it to the final round five times throughout his 17 seasons as a competitive pro in the competition, with two runner-ups and two third-place finishes. Chmerkovskiy won his first Dancing with the Stars title on May 20, 2014, with Olympic ice dancer Meryl Davis. Chmerkovskiy has also been on Broadway in the dance plays Burn the Floor and Forever Tango.

Maksim Chmerkovskiy’s Wiki, Bio

Chmerkovskiy was born in Odesa, Ukrainian SSR, to Aleksandr “Sasha” Chmerkovskiy and Larisa Chmerkovskaya on January 17, 1980. Valentin Chmerkovskiy (born 1986), his younger brother, is also a professional dancer. He has described himself as Jewish, his father is Jewish and his mother is Christian.

When Chmerkovskiy’s parents enrolled him in an art education school at the age of four, he began dancing. The school’s goal was to teach children how to be young gentlemen or ladies, with a focus on politeness and ballroom dancing. He later moved on to ten-dance competitions, which include both ballroom and Latin dances. Chmerkovskiy also played tennis, soccer, and swimming as a kid. He shattered his right leg in a skiing accident when he was 13 and needed a titanium rod to stabilize it. Doctors predicted long-term problems and little chance of a dancing career, yet he recovered and was dancing again six months later.

In 1994, the family relocated to Brooklyn, New York.

For Chmerkovskiy and his family, the hurdles of immigration included financial and language barriers. Chmerkovskiy had a fresh pair of rollerblades stolen on his second day in the United States. Moving to the United States also allowed Chmerkovskiy to recommit himself to dancing. He began dancing as entertainment at a small Russian restaurant when he was 15 years old. While working at the restaurant, Chmerkovskiy realized that competing in dance competitions would be a good way to make money.

Maksim Chmerkovskiy’s Family, Parents

The name of Maksim Chmerkovskiy’s father remains unknown. We do not know any other information regarding His Father; nevertheless, we will attempt to gather information and provide an update as soon as possible. His mother’s name isn’t known. We don’t have any new information regarding his mother, but we’ll do our best to gather it and provide an update as soon as possible. We also have no notion who his brother and sister are or what their names are. However, we are working hard to compile all available information about Maksim Chmerkovskiy and will provide an update as soon as possible.

Maksim Chmerkovskiy’s Relationship, Wife

In 2009, he was engaged for nine months to fellow DWTS pro and Ukrainian Karina Smirnoff. Chmerkovskiy began dating Peta Murgatroyd, another DWTS pro, in 2012, but the relationship ended after ten months in 2013. In October of 2014, Chmerkovskiy and Murgatroyd reconnected. On December 5, 2015, Chmerkovskiy proposed to Murgatroyd on onstage in Miami, Florida, for a performance of Sway: A Dance Trilogy. Shai Aleksander, Chmerkovskiy and Murgatroyd’s son, was born on January 4, 2017, and they married on July 8, 2017, in a modern ceremony in Long Island, New York.

Maksim Chmerkovskiy’s Career

Chmerkovskiy participated in the International Latin category at the professional level as a dancer. Chmerkovskiy placed second in the United States and seventh in the globe among professional international Latin couples with partner Elena Grinenko, with whom he competed from 2002 to 2005. At the age of 16, Chmerkovskiy and his father launched Rising Stars Dance Academy, a youth-oriented competitive dance studio on the second story of a building his father owned in Ridgewood, New Jersey. Chmerkovskiy stated that he chose New Jersey since Brooklyn already had a profusion of dance studios that he detested. The studio moved several times before settling in Saddle Brook, New Jersey. In 2011, when asked why he chose New Jersey, he responded, “I didn’t want to build a studio that became just another one in the neighbourhood. I wanted to open my studio somewhere unique, where people would be able to gaze at it without preconceived assumptions.” For fifteen seasons, Chmerkovskiy participated as a professional dancer on Dancing with the Stars. He was dubbed “the bad boy of the ballroom” by many.

In Week 10 of Season 17, he served as a guest judge during the semifinals. During Week 5 of Season 21, Chmerkovskiy returned to the ballroom as a guest judge. In Week 5 of Season 22, switch-up week, Chmerkovskiy returned to the judge’s bench once more. Peta Murgatroyd, Chmerkovskiy’s fiancée, was one of the competitors that week. That season, she won with model Nyle DiMarco.

Choreographing for Wynn Las Vegas’s water-based show Le Rêve is one of his major accomplishments. On July 25, 2009, Chmerkovskiy debuted as a dancer in the Broadway play Burn the Floor. He danced and performed onstage alongside old dance colleague Karina Smirnoff in the Broadway show Forever Tango from July 9 to August 18, 2013. Chmerkovskiy also began performing in Sway: A Dance Trilogy in Westbury, New York, in 2014. Maksim and his younger brother, Valentin, announced plans for a 45-city live tour on February 12, 2016. Maks and Val Live On Tour: Our Way kicked off on June 15, 2016.

In 2009, he was a contestant on ABC’s “The Superstars,” where he was paired with Freestyle Skier Kristi Leskinen. They were victorious in the competition. In 2021, Chmerkovskiy performed as “Sloth” on The Masked Dancer, a spin-off of The Masked Singer, and placed second. Chmerkovskiy played “The Bachelor” in the Ukrainian version of the dating reality show “The Bachelor” in 2011. Chmerkovskiy has also served as a judge on India’s version of Dancing with the Stars, “Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa.” In the Ukrainian version of Dancing with the Stars, “Tantsi z zirkamy,” Chmerkovskiy starred as a judge in 2021.

Maksim Chmerkovskiy’s Net Worth

During his career as a dancer and choreographer, he has amassed a substantial fortune. During his stint on the hit show DWTS, the 42-year-old dancer soared to fame. He initially appeared on the show during season two, when he was performing. From 2006 to the present, he has been a member of the DWTS family. During the season 18 finale, Maksim and his dance partner, Olympic gold champion Meryl Davis, brought home the trophy. His net worth is believed to be $8 million, according to Celebrity Net Worth.

Here is the full bio of Maksim Chmerkovskiy, his family, mother, father, brother, sister, spouse, children, school, education, hometown, profession, nationality, actor, model, social media influencer, body measurements, age, height, weight, eye color, hair color, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, cast, birthday, birthplace, hobbies, address, zodiac sign, date of birth, religion, net worth.

Maksim Chmerkovskiy’s Bio, Height, Weight, Profile, Net Worth

Social Media Accounts:

Instagram

Some Lesser Known Facts About Maksim Chmerkovskiy

He was matched with Denise Richards for the ninth season of Dancing with the Stars on February 9, 2009, according to Good Morning America.

Due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Chmerkovskiy confirmed that he had fled to Poland in March 2022.

Chmerkovskiy is a Russian speaker who is also fluent in Ukrainian.

When Chmerkovskiy moved to the United States, he didn’t speak the language.

He claims that reading street signs in Brooklyn taught him English.

Also Read: Louise Woodward: Wiki, Bio, Age, Height, Parents, Husband, Net Worth

Subscribe to us to get the latest updates about Maksim Chmerkovskiy!