Publish date: 2024-06-25

Chiwetel Ejiofor is an English actor of Nigerian descent who has had an amazing career. The award-winning British actor is a household name in Hollywood, best known for starring in the 2012 historical drama 12 Years a Slave.

Early Life Scar

Chiwetelu Umeadi Ejiofor was born on July 10, 1977.in Forest Gate, London, England to Nigerian parents Obiajulu and Arinze Ejiofor, both of Igbo origin. His father was a doctor and musician, his mother a pharmacist. Chiwetel lost his father in a car accident while visiting Nigeria when he was just 11 and his father when he was 39. The tragic accident on the way to a wedding also left young Chiwetel physically injured. A long, thin scar on his forehead testifies to his survival after the incident, which left him hospitalized for more than two months.

sister

Chiwetel is the second of four siblings. One of his sisters, Zain Asher, is a popular CNN correspondent and the other, Kandibe Ejiofor, is a doctor.

career success

Chiwetel Ejiofor developed a passion for acting as a teenager and began acting in plays at Dulwich College at the age of 13. He soon joined the National Youth Theater before earning a scholarship to the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art. He has stage appearances in plays including Romeo and Juliet , Blue/Orange and Othello.

Ejiofor’s great performances and talent on stage soon caught the attention of Hollywood bigwigs. He made his television debut in the 1996 thriller Deadly Journey . When famed director Steven Spielberg offered him a supporting role in his feature film Amistad opposite Morgan Freeman in 1997, Chiwetel’s career changed forever. This breakthrough role eventually prompted Ejiofor to leave the academy after his freshman year. The British actor has been involved in many other projects and has gone on to play versatile roles such as Okwe in the 2002 film Dirty Pretty Things. He came as Mike Terry, a martial arts instructor in the 2008 film Red Beltand as ANC leader Thabo Mbeki in the 2009 doc-drama Endgame. Perhaps his role in the 2013 historical drama 12 Years a Slave as Solomon Northup is a man born free but kidnapped and forced into slavery is particularly noteworthy.

Chiwetel Ejiofor’s contributions to the industry have earned him multiple awards, including three Golden Globe nominations. But his outstanding performance in the historical drama 12 Years a Slave brought him wider recognition worldwide. For the success of the film, he received an Oscar nomination for Best Actor in 2014, as well as a nomination from the Golden Globes. He received an Emmy Award nomination for his performance in the miniseries Dancing on the Edge. Ejiofor has also been recognized with wins at a variety of film festivals.

Wealth (income and earnings)

The talented TV personality has consistently has performed well in many films in both the lead and supporting roles throughout his career. With an estimated net worth of $12 million, Chiwetel, who says acting was never really about money but a way to explore deeper questions about himself, was able to make a good sum from his efforts in to earn in the industry.

Is Chiwetel Ejiofor married with wife and children?

Ejiofor has an interesting love life and has been associated with some beautiful women. He has been in romantic relationships with celebrities like Naomie Harris from (2000 to 2007) and is also rumored to have dated Lupita Nyong’o sometime in 2012.

As of 2013, Chiwetel Ejiofor had a love affair with Canadian actress Sari Mercer. However, the couple had a short-lived relationship after a few years and broke up with no party revealing the real reason behind their breakup. Shortly after splitting from Mercer, he began dating Frances Aaternir, an Australian model, in September 2015. Chiwetel and Frances, who have been spotted together on various occasions, are going strong and showing no signs of a split.

Ejiofor is not married and has no children yet, but he hopes that one day life will help him to regulate these decisions and events. Despite not being gay, the British star is also an LGBT supporter who condemns gay people who hide their identities and sexuality.

Height

The pretty Ejiofor is neither one of your tallest nor the shortest. The 12 Years a Slave star stands at 5 feet 10 inches and weighs 72 kilograms.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7u7PRZ6WerF%2Bau3DDyKSgaK%2BYpHqqv4ycn6KvlamyrXnEo6Conp%2Bneqm10mauop6VYsCqv9OeqWabmJ65pb7Ep2ShnZmctbV50pyYq2WemsFuw86rq6Fn