Archery’s history at the Olympic Games is split into two periods: the early era and the modern era.

The sport featured on the programme of the Olympic Games in 1900, 1904, 1908 and 1920 during the early era. It was also one of the first sports to feature women’s events, in 1904. The competition formats were inconsistent, often based on local rules, and archery was subsequently dropped from the programme. World Archery was founded in 1931 with the goal of rejoining the Games.

Archery returned to the Olympic Games in 1972 and has remained on the programme ever since. During this modern era, the competition format has evolved toward exciting, easily accessible and broadcast-friendly head-to-head matchplay. Two gold medals, for the individual events, were awarded from 1972 to 1984; team events were added in 1988. The mixed team event was added for 2020, bringing the total number of Olympic Champion titles available in the archery competitions to five.

Currently, 64 men and 64 women compete in target archery events with recurve bows at the Olympics. The reigning Olympic Champions are Korea's Ku Bonchan and Chang Hye Jin.

Since 2004, the archery competitions at the Olympic Games have often been held in iconic locations like the Panathinaikos Stadium (2004), Lord’s Cricket Ground (2012) and the Sambodromo (2016).

Current competition format

Archers at the Olympic Games use recurve bows and compete in the discipline of target archery.

The competition features individual, mixed team and team events. A mixed team consists of two archers, one man and one woman, shooting in the same category (with the same bow). A team consists of three archers of the same gender shooting in the same category (with the same bow).

Nations must qualify quota places. A maximum of 128 athletes can compete, 64 men and 64 women. Places are won at world qualifying events and continental qualifying events. A small number of places are assigned using the universality system, which ensures archery’s developing countries can participate and the competition field remains diverse. Each country can send a maximum of three men and three women to the Olympic Games.

Archers shoot over a distance of 70 metres at targets measuring 122 centimetres in diameter, aiming to hit a 10-ring measuring just 12.2 centimetres in diameter. The qualification phase of the competition, which consists of 72 arrows shot for total score, seeds the archers for the matchplay phase.

Archers and teams shoot in head-to-head brackets, in which the winner of each match advances and the loser is eliminated until a champion is crowned.