Archery first appeared at the 1900 Olympics in Paris. There were archery events for the next few Olympics, but then it disappeared from the Olympic program for more than 50 years. It reappeared at Munich in 1972 and has remained a fixture of the Olympics ever since.

Early archery competitions varied in format. Since 1988, there have been men's and women's individual and team events.

Archery at the Paris 2024 Olympics

The current Olympic archery competition consists of five medal events: men's individual, women's individual, men's team, and women's team, and the mixed team recurve returning after its debut in Tokyo. In all events, the distance from the archer to the target is 70 meters.

men's individual

women's individual

men's team

women's team

mixed team recurve

Archery Trivia

The best all-time performing archer at the Olympic Games is Hubert Van Innis of Belgium, who won six gold medals between 1900 and 1920. See more on the Greatest Archers at the Olympics.

British archers Jessie and Brenda Wadworth are only the second mother and daughter to compete at the same Olympics. They competed in 1908 in the only archery event open to women, the double National round competition. Jessie came forth, while Brenda finished in ninth place.

The flag bearer in the opening ceremony for Iran in Rio was archer Zahra Nemati. She was making her Olympic Games debut, though four years earlier she became the first woman from Iran to win a Paralympic gold medal.

Early Olympic Games had unique archery events, with unusual names like the following (see more about discontinued Olympic Archery Events): Au Cordon Doré, Au Chapelet, Sur la Perche à la Herse, Sur la Perche à la Pyramide, Team round., Double American round, Double Columbia round, Double National round, Double York round, Continental style, Individual fixed with large and small bird, Individual moving bird, Team fixed large and small bird, Team moving bird.

The archery competitions in Athens in 2004 were staged in the same Panathenaic Stadium that was used for the 1896 Olympics.

Korean women archers have won 14 out of 15 gold medals in the women's events since 1984 (up to 2014)

The South Korean women's team won their tenth straight title in 2024, having won everyÂ women's team archery competitionÂ at the Olympics.

Related Pages