The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC) has concluded its successful participation in the 30th Beijing International Book Fair, held in the Chinese capital from 19 to 23 June 2024, where it showcased its most prominent projects and initiatives in various fields of publishing, translation, knowledge, and literature.

The Centre shed light on its role in supporting the translation movement to and from Arabic through its flagship Kalima Project for Translation – the most prominent of its kind in the Arab world – as well as on its contributions to publishing and authorship through the Esdarat programme, which has produced hundreds of Arabic books. The ALC also highlighted the range of exhibitions, festivals, conferences, and activities it organises that centre around books, language, and creative industries.

Throughout the course of the Fair, the Centre offered a comprehensive programme, in an effort to enhance cooperation in the creative industries and enrich the cultures of both nations through joint projects that enable the establishment of valuable intellectual and cultural systems. Some of the most notable events in the programme included a seminar titled ‘Between Arabic and Chinese: Language and Cultural Communication’, in collaboration with the China International Communications Group (CICG), setting the stage for the comprehensive cooperation protocol signed between the two parties.

The seminar was attended by His Excellency Hussain Al Hammadi, UAE Ambassador to China; H.E. Prof. Dr. Jamal Sanad Al Suwaidi, Vice President of the Board of Trustees of the Emirates Centre for Strategic Studies and Research; H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre; H.E. Khaled Al Shehhi, Deputy Chief of the UAE Mission to China, and Gao Anming, Vice President and Editor-in-Chief of the China International Communications Group.

ALC Chairman H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim signed an agreement with CICG to launch the China Academic Books series in Arabic. The signing ceremony was organised by the Foreign Language Press and the China Centre for Contemporary World Studies. The agreement aims to enhance communication between different cultures, in line with the vision of the wise leadership in the UAE and its capital, Abu Dhabi.

H.E. bin Tamim said: “The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre strives to achieve the ambitious vision of the UAE’s wise leadership to disseminate Arab culture, build bridges of communication with communities around the world, and establish partnerships in all fields related to language and culture to serve the present and future of humanity.”

“Over the past decade, Abu Dhabi has consistently participated in the Beijing International Book Fair, becoming the most regular Arab participant,” H.E. added. “Meanwhile, the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair hosted more than 190 Chinese publishing houses over its last four editions, making it the most attractive international destination for Chinese publishers. Indeed, Chinese participation in the most recent session of the Fair was the largest in the country’s history of participation in global events.”

“We must work harder to make language a foundation for developing cultural industries, exchanging knowledge, and spreading it among people around the world. It also critical that we recognise the importance of focusing on technology and artificial intelligence, steering these breakthroughs towards achieving sustainability in human values and enhancing multiculturalism,” H.E. bin Tamim concluded.

Other ALC activities at the fair included the launch of the Chinese edition of ‘His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan: Insights into the Journey of the Man of Humanity’ in the presence of its author, H.E. Dr. Jamal Sanad Al-Suwaidi. The book focuses on His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE, and sheds light on various aspects of his exceptional journey.

H.E. Hussain Al Hammadi, UAE Ambassador to China, said: “This year, we celebrate the 40th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between our two countries, which have succeeded in building a strong strategic partnership based on the solid foundations of shared values, common interests, mutual respect, and commitment to supporting the development and prosperity of both nations.”

“Through cultural communication, we can transcend geographical borders and language differences, and through literary arts and music, we discover the common grounds that bind us together,” H.E. Al Hammadi continued. “The UAE Embassy in Beijing is committed to supporting cultural communication between the Arab world and China, including supporting the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre, which is at the forefront of institutions specialising in teaching the Arabic language to non-native speakers.”

The ALC's agenda for the fair also included a panel discussion that brought together prominent researchers, namely Farida Wang Fu, recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award in Translation in China; Zhao Lijun, Director of the China Today magazine publishing house; Wang Jun Xiao, Secretary-General of the China Cultural Publishing House; Ahmed Al Saeed, CEO of Bayt Elhekma for Creative Industries, which is a recipient of the Sheikh Zayed Book Award; and Dr. Berlant Qabeel, Programmes Section Head at the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre.

Furthermore, ALC Chairman H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim attended the professional meeting to explore opportunities for cooperation between Chinese and Arab publishers, where he stated that translation plays a critical role in fostering understanding between peoples and bringing cultures closer together, stressing that when translating, it is imperative to respect the value systems of the cultures involved.

Meanwhile, the ALC delegation visited the China National Academy of Painting, run by the Ministries of Culture and Tourism in Beijing. The two sides exchanged information about their respective institutions, exploring opportunities for collaboration. Officials from the Academy expressed interest in participating in the Centre’s events, most notably the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair and the Arabian Days festival.

For his part, Gao Anming, Vice President and Editor-in-Chief of the China International Communications Group (CICG), said: “I visited the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre in September and explored its efforts to promote exchange between different cultures through language. Over the course of an entire year, the CICG Centre for Europe and Africa cooperated with the ALC, achieving notable results.”

Gao Anming went on to note that “With the Centre’s support, our Group participated in the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair 2024, which hosted a conference to present the Arabic edition of President Xi Jinping’s book ‘The Belt and Road Initiative’. Furthermore, China Today magazine launched the ‘China’s Intangible Cultural Heritage’ pavilion, allowing Arab audiences to enjoy the charm of Chinese culture.”

“As the oldest and largest comprehensive media institution in China,” he continued, “the China International Communications Group recognises the importance of language as a vehicle for culture and a symbol of civilisation. By translating and publishing Arabic works, readers can learn about the Arab world’s rich cultural heritage. Similarly, translating and publishing Chinese works allows us to introduce the world to the modern China.”

Anming outlined three areas for cooperation with the ALC, the first of which is deepening collaboration with the Centre to introduce and translate outstanding foreign cultural and literary works, in addition to presenting notable Chinese works to international audiences, thereby enhancing mutual understanding and respect between different cultures.

The second area of collaboration is organising art exhibitions, reading clubs, cultural seminars, and meetings with authors, while the third and final area consists of training talented professionals who master multiple languages and cultures in order to enhance cultural exchange between China and Arab countries, support language education, and strengthen intercultural communication skills among language learners.

The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC) organised a seminar titled ‘Between Arabic and Chinese: Language and Cultural Communication’, in collaboration with the China International Communications Group (CICG), as part of its participation in the 30th Beijing International Book Fair, held in the Chinese capital from 19 to 23 June 2024.

The Centre has prepared a comprehensive programme for the Fair, in an effort to enhance cooperation in the fields of creative industries and enrich the cultures of both peoples through joint projects that serve to build valuable intellectual and cultural systems.

His Excellency Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of the ALC, said: “The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre strives to achieve the ambitious vision of the UAE’s wise leadership to revive Arab civilisation, build bridges of communication with cultures around the world, and establish partnerships in all fields related to language and culture to serve the present and future of humanity.”

“Over the past decade, Abu Dhabi has consistently participated in the Beijing International Book Fair, becoming the most regular Arab participant,” H.E. added. “Meanwhile, the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair hosted more than 190 Chinese publishing houses over its last four editions, making it the most attractive international destination for Chinese publishers. Indeed, Chinese participation in the most recent session of the Fair was the largest in the country’s history of participation in global events.”

“Today, we launch the Chinese edition of the book ‘His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan: Insights into the Journey of the Man of Humanity’ in the presence of its author, H.E. Dr. Jamal Sanad Al-Suwaidi, a book that focuses on His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE, and sheds light on various aspects of his exceptional journey,” H.E. bin Tamim noted, stressing the importance of focusing on technology and artificial intelligence to ensure the sustainability of human values and enhance cultural diversity. “We must work harder to make language a foundation for developing cultural industries, exchanging knowledge, and spreading it among people around the world.”

“We were keen to attend the Beijing International Book Fair to introduce the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre to audiences here and highlight its role in promoting translation to and from Arabic with its Kalima Project for Translation – the most important Arab project of its kind,” the ALC Chairman continued. “Moreover, we shed light on the Centre’s contributions towards supporting publishing and authorship through its Esdarat programme, which has produced hundreds of Arabic books, as well as its efforts in organising exhibitions, festivals, conferences, and activities related to books, language, and creative industries.”

For his part, H.E. Hussain Al Hammadi, UAE Ambassador to China, said: “This year, we celebrate the 40th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between our two countries, which have succeeded in building a strong strategic partnership based on the solid foundations of shared values, common interests, mutual respect, and commitment to supporting the development and prosperity of both nations.”

“Through cultural communication, we can transcend geographical borders and language differences, and through literary arts and music, we discover the common grounds that bind us together,” H.E. Al Hammadi continued. “The UAE Embassy in Beijing is committed to supporting cultural communication between the Arab world and China, including supporting the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre, which is at the forefront of institutions specialising in teaching the Arabic language to non-native speakers.”

Meanwhile, Gao Anming, Vice President and Editor-in-Chief of the China International Communications Group (CICG), said: “I visited the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre in September and explored its efforts to promote exchange between different cultures through language. The CICG Centre for Europe and Africa, part of the China International Communications Group, collaborated with the ALC over the course of nearly an entire year, achieving significant results in the process.”

“With the Centre’s support, our Group participated in the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair 2024, which hosted a conference to present the Arabic edition of President Xi Jinping’s book ‘The Belt and Road Initiative’,” he added, “Furthermore, China Today magazine launched the ‘China’s Intangible Cultural Heritage’ pavilion, allowing Arab audiences to enjoy the charm of Chinese culture.”

“As the oldest and largest comprehensive media institution in China, the China International Communications Group recognises the importance of language as a vehicle for culture and a symbol of civilisation,” Anming asserted. “By translating and publishing Arabic works, readers can learn about the Arab world’s rich cultural heritage. Similarly, translating and publishing Chinese works allows us to introduce the world to the modern China.”

Anming outlined three areas for cooperation with the ALC, the first of which is deepening collaboration with the Centre to introduce and translate outstanding foreign cultural and literary works, in addition to presenting notable Chinese works to international audiences, thereby enhancing mutual understanding and respect between different cultures.

The second area of collaboration is organising art exhibitions, reading clubs, cultural seminars, and meetings with authors, while the third and final area consists of training talented professionals who master multiple languages and cultures in order to enhance cultural exchange between China and Arab countries, support language education, and strengthen intercultural communication skills among language learners.

A panel discussion was held with prominent researchers taking part, including Farida Wang Fu, recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award in Translation in China; Zhao Lijun, Director of the China Today magazine publishing house; Wang Jun Xiao, Secretary-General of the China Cultural Publishing House; Ahmed Al Saeed, CEO of Bayt Elhekma for Creative Industries, which is a recipient of the Sheikh Zayed Book Award; and Dr. Berlant Qabeel, Programmes Section Head at the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre.

On a similar note, the ALC signed an agreement to launch the China Academic Books series in Arabic, in an effort to enhance communication between various cultures, in line with the vision of the wise leadership in the UAE and its capital, Abu Dhabi.

Moreover, ALC Chairman H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim attended the professional meeting to explore opportunities for cooperation between Chinese and Arab publishers, where he stated that translation plays a critical role in fostering understanding between peoples and bringing cultures closer together, stressing that when translating, it is imperative to respect the value systems of the cultures involved.

The ALC delegation visited the China National Academy of Painting, run by the Ministries of Culture and Tourism in Beijing. The two sides exchanged information about their respective institutions, exploring opportunities for collaboration. Officials from the Academy expressed interest in participating in the Centre’s events, most notably the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair and the Arabian Days festival.

The Sheikh Zayed Book Award (SZBA), organised by the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC), part of the Department of Culture and Tourism – Abu Dhabi (DCT Abu Dhabi), organised an academic conference on the significant influence of ‘Arabian Nights’ in Spain on 10 June 2024, in collaboration with the Casa Árabe foundation in Madrid, bringing together academic speakers and Arabic language and literature experts.

Titled ‘Arabian Nights: A Cultural Journey across Continents and Centuries, from Abu Dhabi to Madrid via Tokyo and London’, the conference reflected the Sheikh Zayed Book Award's unwavering commitment to fostering robust ties with Casa Árabe, as it seeks to bridge the gap between Arab and Spanish cultures and strengthen dialogue and understanding among cultures worldwide.

A delegation from the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre attended the Conference, bringing together H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of ALC and Secretary-General of the Sheikh Zayed Book Award; Abdulrahman Mohamed Al-Naqbi, Director of the ALC’s Literary Awards Department; H.E. Omar Obaid Alshamsi, Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates to the Kingdom of Spain; H.E. Hala Keyrouz, Ambassador of Lebanon to Spain; H.E. Khalifa Al Kharafi, Kuwaiti Ambassador to Spain; H.E. Raghad Al Saqqa, Ambassador of Jordan to Spain; H.E. Zeineb Ely Salem, Ambassador of Mauritania to Spain; H.E. Abdullah Hallak, Chargé d'Affaires of the Syrian Embassy in Spain; and `H.E. Hisham Nouri, from the cultural attaché of the Yemeni Embassy in Spain`. A select group of Arab and Spanish academics, authors, and literary figures were also in attendance.

H.E. Saood Abdulaziz Al Hosani, Undersecretary of DCT Abu Dhabi, said: “Our collaboration with Casa Árabe in Madrid to hold the ‘Arabian Nights’ conference is part of Abu Dhabi's endeavours to develop platforms that bring together different peoples and cultures around the world, fostering bridges of dialogue based on tolerance, understanding, respect and acceptance of others' cultures. Through these conferences, we also aim to promote and disseminate the Arabic language, introducing its literature, heritage and cultural and civilisational legacy.”

H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of ALC and Secretary-General of the Sheikh Zayed Book Award, said: “The Sheikh Zayed Book Award is dedicated to upholding the values of tolerance, dialogue, and cooperation among various cultures and peoples around the world, enriching the cultural landscape. Spain served as the inaugural destination for our ‘Arabian Nights’ conference, and will be followed by two additional stops in Japan and the United Kingdom, reflecting our continuous efforts to promote and disseminate Arab culture internationally. We hope this conference inspires more thinkers, researchers, translators and students, encouraging them to delve deeper into Arab culture. We also aim to contribute to cultural communication with Spain, building bridges of communication and understanding between peoples.’

Irene Lozano Domingo, General Director of Casa Árabe Foundation, said: “At Casa Árabe, we are very happy to be able to work together with one of the most important cultural institution in the Gulf region. Organising this seminar dedicated to ‘Arabian Nights’ is just one more example of our close collaboration and good harmony. The alliance with SZBA allows us to reinforce our presence as a Spanish institution of public diplomacy in the region, thus contributing to building bridges and improving understanding between our societies.”

With its enduring tales, stories, and characters, ‘Arabian Nights’ stands as a testament to human creativity, enriching world literature and serving as a bridge between Arab culture and others, particularly bridging East and West. It was translated into numerous international languages and inspired countless writers, artists, and poets, becoming a timeless human heritage passed down through generations. The work continues to be studied, critiqued, and analysed till today across the East and the West.

The conference coincided with the Madrid International Book Fair, providing an opportunity for communication and cultural exchange among the participating dignitaries.

The conference hosted a panel discussion on ‘The Influence of the Arabian Nights in Spain’, featuring distinguished renowned researchers and specialists including: Luis Alberto de Cuenca, a renowned writer, poet, critic, translator and academic, who twice served as the Secretary of Culture of Spain and former Director of the National Library, and was a laureate in 2015 of the National Poetry Award. He delivered a special keynote at the conference.

The list also included Paulo Lemos Horta, Assistant Professor of Literature at NYU Abu Dhabi, who has published extensive research on ‘Arabian Nights’ and recently edited a new annotated edition translated by Yasmine Seale; Salvador Peña Martín, Professor of Arabic Language and Translation at the University of Malaga, who has also taught at the universities of Baghdad, Leeds, Granada, Tetouan, and Castilla-La Mancha. His previous writings focused on the reception of ‘Arabian Nights’ in Spain, and in 2017, he received the National Translation Prize of Spain for his Spanish translation of ‘Arabian Nights’.

Mounira Soliman, Professor of English at Cairo University, was also on the panel; she co-edited Popular Culture in the Middle East and North Africa: A Postcolonial Outlook (2013), in which she explored the fantasy of ‘Arabian Nights’ in Western culture. And lastly, Desirée López Bernal, Senior Professor in the Department of Semitic Studies at the University of Granada, where she teaches subjects related to classical Arabic literature and the transmission of Arabic literature to European literatures. Her research revolves around these two thematic axes, and she is the author of several studies on the trace of Arabic storytelling in Spanish and European written literature and oral tradition. She is currently participating in a research project titled ‘The corpus of oral narrative in the western Mediterranean basin: comparative study and digital edition’.

Meanwhile, Iraqi visual artist Hanoos Hanoos delivered an audiovisual presentation, drawing from his recent exhibition Shahrazad and the Arabian Nights. Hanoos Hanoos is a painter and modern art teacher. He has held more than 50 national and international exhibitions and has won 35 painting awards. He has been widely celebrated in Spain for his fostering of cultural links between the country and the Arab world. His works inspired by Arabian Nights have been displayed at the Royal Botanical Gardens in Madrid.

The conference concluded its programme with a concert by world-renowned Lebanese artist Abeer Nehme, celebrating the strength and enduring nature of cultural ties between Spain and the Arab world. In addition to her career as a singer and composer, Abeer works to facilitate cultural and musical dialogue within the Arab world and beyond. During the concert, she was accompanied by a Spanish band presenting a musical performance of Andalusian muwashahat and other songs that celebrated both Arab and Spanish cultures.

The United Arab Emirates and the People’s Republic of China enjoy strong bilateral relations that have spanned decades. The historic visit of the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, Founding Father of the UAE, to Beijing in May 1990 marked the first visit by a leader from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries to China. This visit ushered in a new phase of cooperation between the two countries and laid the foundation for their robust cultural relations.

During this visit, it was decided to establish the Emirates Centre for the Arabic Language and Islamic Studies, which has served as a key channel for civilisational and cultural communication between the Chinese and Arab peoples since its opening in 1994. The Centre continues to receive ongoing support from the UAE, encouraged by the deep-seated bilateral relations between the two countries, which continue to grow with mutual visits from officials of both countries.

On that note, China was Guest of Honour at the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair (ADIBF) in 2017, an exceptional edition that marked a significant milestone in the history of cultural exchange between the two countries. The Fair featured 120 cultural and artistic events, welcoming a Chinese delegation of more than 300 participants, and showcasing more than a thousand books.

The UAE-China cultural cooperation, now spearheaded by the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC), has made significant strides, growing stronger and setting ever deeper roots. Over the past five years, the ADIBF has topped the list of Arab exhibitions with the highest number of Chinese participants, becoming the only exhibition for which Chinese Government agencies issue circulars to encourage Chinese publishers and companies to participate.

For its part, Abu Dhabi has consistently participated in the Beijing International Book Fair (BIBF) over the past 10 years, becoming the most regular Arab participant.

Organised by the ALC, the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair has hosted some of China’s most renowned and influential authors, recipients of the prestigious Mao Dun Literature Prize, often referred to as the Chinese Nobel. Moreover, the Book Fair has seen the launch of more than 100 Chinese titles translated into Arabic in recent years, while in the last four editions alone, the exhibition welcomed over 190 Chinese publishing houses and more than 200 publishers, writers, and officials, who have participated in the Fair, either in-person or through representatives. This number represents one-third of all publishing houses in China, making ADIBF the most attractive international destination for Chinese publishers.

In an unprecedented move among Arab capitals, Abu Dhabi witnessed the launch of the Arabic editions of two books authored by Chinese President Xi Jinping: ‘The Governance of China’ in 2018, and ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ in 2024.

In the last three years, reports have indicated that the activities of the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair were covered in Chinese media more than 170 times, making it the most prominently featured event in Chinese media. This coverage set the stage for a dedicated report about the UAE in the official Chinese news broadcast, aired by over 100 Chinese channels and watched by more than a billion viewers.

The report followed the ALC’s success in hosting a seminar to present the Arabic edition of President Xi Jinping’s book, as part of the ADIBF 2024 agenda, in collaboration with the China Media Group and the Chinese Embassy in the UAE. The segment covered the seminar, highlighting the UAE’s pivotal role in the Belt and Road Initiative, and broadcasting promotional tourism scenes about Abu Dhabi.

The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre boasts the largest number of joint cooperation protocols with Chinese cultural and media entities, most notably the comprehensive cooperation protocols with the China Media Group and the Beijing International Book Fair.

The official BIBF website ranks His Excellency Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of the ALC, among the seven most important international guests in the field of publishing and culture at last year’s Fair, and in addition to that, more than 10 conferences on Arab-Chinese cooperation in culture, publishing, and advertising have been organised under the Centre’s patronage both in Beijing and Abu Dhabi.

On the same note, the Centre collaborated with the China Media Group to launch the Arab-Chinese Cooperation Centre for Publishing and Culture, the first Chinese-Arab platform serving the publishing sector in the two countries, while most recently, the China Publishing Association, Beijing International Book Fair, and China Publishers Group participated in the ADIBF Professional Programme.

And marking the first Arab recognition of efforts in the field of Arab-Chinese cultural exchange, the House of Wisdom Group for Cultural Industries was granted the world-renowned Sheikh Zayed Book Award (SZBA) in the Publishing and Technology category. In 2011, the SZBA chose late Chinese orientalist Chung Jikun as the Cultural Personality of the Year.

Meanwhile, in terms of exchanging publishing and translations rights, more than 300 agreements have been signed between Chinese and Arab publishers at the ADIBF over the past three years.

Adding to that, and as part of the Centre’s efforts to enhance Arab-Chinese cultural cooperation, the ALC Chairman made official visits to Renmin University of China, Peking University, Beijing Foreign Studies University, the Sheikh Zayed Centre in Beijing, the Chinese Ministry of Publicity, and the China Media Group, further strengthening Abu Dhabi’s cultural standing among Chinese intellectuals and officials.

The Abu Dhabi International Book Fair received high praise from various parties in China, with Chinese publishers describing it in media interviews as “the foremost Arab destination for Arab-Chinese cultural cooperation, a promising market for cultural industries, and a global platform for professional exchange in the field of publishing.”

Over the course of the past year, the Centre welcomed high-level visiting officials, including the Chinese Vice Minister of Publicity (ministerial level) and two Vice Presidents of the China Media Group, paving the way for unprecedented Chinese participation in the ADIBF and more robust Emirati-Chinese cultural collaboration.

China’s unprecedented participation in this year’s ADIBF reflected the notable and growing Arab-Chinese rapprochement, now centred in the UAE, which underlines the Emirates’ pioneering role in bringing cultures together, while highlighting China’s significant interest in Arab culture and audiences, to whom it aims to present its culture. This, in turn, creates a positive environment for more translations between Arabic and Chinese, and provides additional opportunities for communicating Arab knowledge to a major country the size of China.

The substantial Chinese participation also extended the impact of the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair beyond the region to the global level, solidifying its position as a leading book fair on the world stage. It also paved the way for the launch of sustainable cultural and professional projects between Abu Dhabi and Beijing.

Continuing on this communication-centred approach, a delegation from the ALC, headed by H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim, will visit the Beijing International Book Fair, which launches on 19 June. The visit underscores China’s importance to the Centre, paving the way for new collaborations that serve all of its sectors and meet its strategic objectives, in line with the UAE’s foreign policy of openness to world cultures, which further enhances Abu Dhabi’s international cultural standing and promotes the Arabic language globally.

During this visit, the ALC will sign a strategic cooperation protocol with the China Media Group, a leading cultural and media entity and the primary official body in China, in charge of international cooperation in the fields of language, culture, publishing, media, and studies. The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre will be the first Arab entity to sign such a protocol with the Group.

Moreover, the visit will include professional meetings with major Chinese publishing houses and officials responsible for the publishing and cultural sectors in China, in an effort to promote the Centre’s initiatives, such as the Kalima Project for Translation, as well as the awards it offers and the book fairs it organises.

Also on the agenda for the visit is a seminar – the first of its kind to be held in China – titled ‘The Arabic Language and Civilisational Communication’, which will be organised during the visit and is set to be attended by senior Chinese officials and dignitaries.

Furthermore, and in recognition of the ALC’s regional influence and status, H.E. bin Tamim will be participating as keynote speaker in an international conference held on the sidelines of the Beijing International Book Fair. The visiting delegation will explore the latest technologies in the fields of publishing, artificial intelligence, and content, inviting leading Chinese entities to its International Congress of Arabic Publishing and Creative Industries (PCI).

The visit aims to introduce influential Chinese players to the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre’s various departments and areas of work, explore opportunities for cooperation, and open new prospects for collaboration between the Centre’s various departments and their Chinese counterparts.

“The United Arab Emirates has led an exceptional experience in comprehensive digital transformation,” asserted His Excellency Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC), at the Jordan Forum for Media and Digital Communication, organised by the Jordanian Ministry of Government Communication.

The Forum was held under the patronage of H.E. Bisher Khasawneh, Prime Minister of Jordan, amid wide Arab and international media coverage. The event was inaugurated by the Minister of Government Communication of Jordan on Tuesday, 21 May 2024.

Representing the ALC at the Forum, H.E. bin Tamim went on to note: “The UAE approaches the matter as a means to make people’s lives easier, adhere to best practices, and provide outstanding services, all in a bid to promote happiness, an objective that the wise leadership holds in the highest regard.”

Culture and the Arabic language are top priorities in the UAE’s digital transformation plans, H.E. explained, noting that this “falls under the wise leadership’s vision to advance and ensure the sustainability of the cultural and creative sectors, in a bid to strengthen their role as part of our ambitious efforts to invest in people, which in turn is a focus of all UAE development strategies.”

“The Arabic language is a leading marker of cultural identity for the Emirati people, and holds a wealth of values, science, knowledge, and creativity,” H.E. bin Tamim continued. “The language is facing major challenges in the modern era, especially with the rapid developments in technology, advances in artificial intelligence, and the evolving channels for acquiring knowledge and science – all of which are challenges that require attention, preparation, and effort.”

“There are undoubtedly many initiatives and projects that serve this goal in various Arab countries,” H.E. said. “There isn’t enough time to discuss all of them, however, it should be noted that the UAE has led an exceptional experience in comprehensive digital transformation, approaching the matter as a means to make people’s lives easier, adhere to best practices, and provide outstanding services. We, at the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre, are part of this advanced ecosystem, designed to ensure the sustainability of the cultural and creative sector, drive it forward, and enhance the presence of the Arabic language – the most prominent component of cultural identity.”

The ALC Chairman shed light on a range of the Centre’s projects and initiatives, launched to enhance the presence of the Arabic language and culture in the digital era, most notably, the Poetry Encyclopaedia, Kanz Al Jeel poetry collection, the digital transformation initiative, Spotlight on Rights, BAREC Readability project, the ALC digital Dictionar, and the Poetic Intelligence Lab, among others.

These projects were designed around a set of objectives to enrich the Arabic language with technology and enrich technology with Arabic content, H.E. explained, affirming that the Arabic language is rich in science, knowledge, art, and literature, yet these treasures are not available in a format suitable for the digital era. “Arabic needs to master the language of this digital era, just as the digital era needs the richness of the Arabic language.”

The Jordan Forum for Media and Digital Communication was held in celebration of the silver jubilee of King Abdullah II’s accession to the throne and the 78th anniversary of the independence of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. Over the course of two days and eight sessions that brought together 30 Jordanian, Arab, and international speakers, the Forum discussed topics related to the challenges facing Arab media and communication sectors in light of rapid technological and digital advancements. Attendees sought to brainstorm innovative solutions to enhance ethics and freedom in media, keeping pace with advancements in the field of digital media and communication.

The Arabic Language and Global Cultural Development

The first International Scientific Forum, organised by the Language Centre at the Jordan University of Science and Technology, welcomed Dr. Ali bin Tamim as a guest of honour and key participant in the Forum’s activities, which, over the course of two days, included several panel discussions and lectures delivered by experts in the fields of language, literature, translation, and language technology. Participants discussed a range of important topics, including the role of translation in transferring knowledge between cultures, the challenges of teaching Arabic to non-native speakers, and the impact of digital technology on the spread of the Arabic language.

In his opening speech, H.E. bin Tamim applauded the Forum’s efforts to discuss the status and role of the Arabic language in the global cultural system, as well as its future prospects. “This role intersects with our efforts at the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre to advance the presence of the Arabic language and instill it among the new generations, enabling them to benefit from its authentic and exceptional knowledge covering various aspects of life,” he said.

The ALC Chairman participated in a session titled ‘The Role of the Arabic Language in Global Cultural Development: Reality and Aspirations’, where he stressed the importance of continuing efforts to preserve the Arabic language, keep it within its authentic and development-oriented domain, and strengthen its presence in contemporary culture. “This is achievable,” he asserted, “provided that effective strategies are followed, most notably to promote linguistic and literary creativity by supporting writers, poets, and creators to produce outstanding artistic and literary works in Arabic. Equally important is encouraging the use of Arabic in various fields of literature and arts, and supporting the development of technology, software, and applications that enhance the use of Arabic in science, technology, and everyday life.”

Moreover, H.E. bin Tamim stressed the importance of supporting the production of digital content in Arabic, focusing on specialised websites, applications, and other digital platforms., He also called for the development of educational programmes that focus on comprehensive learning and mastery of the Arabic language, including among non-native speakers. He also underlined the need to enhance cultural exchange by organising cultural, literary, and artistic events that promote the Arabic language as an integral part of human heritage.

Organised by the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC), the third edition of the International Congress of Arabic Publishing and Creative Industries (PCI) is preparing to host prominent figures in publishing, translation, digital content production, and entrepreneurship from around the world on Sunday, 28 April 2024, at Manarat Al Saadiyat in the UAE capital Abu Dhabi.

The event aims to explore the latest trends shaping the publishing and creative industries, as well as new opportunities for growth and collaboration in this field.

The Congress is the first of its kind in the Arab world and seeks to facilitate dialogue among thought leaders, publishers, content creators, and entrepreneurs across diverse creative disciplines. This year’s edition will highlight transformations reshaping the publishing and education industries, discussing the role and impact of emerging technologies and new business models. Moreover, the event aims to create promising partnerships to support the globalisation of Arabic content through dialogues, discussion panels, workshops, career tracks, and professional meetings bringing together key players from various cultural and creative industries from over 50 countries.

The Congress kicks off with a Keynote Discussion titled ‘Foresight of Growth: Cultural and Creative Industries as a Driver for Economy’, featuring H.E. Mohamed Khalifa Al Mubarak, Chairman of the Department of Culture and Tourism - Abu Dhabi (DCT Abu Dhabi), and Mohamed El-Erian, Internationally Acclaimed Economist and President of Queens’ College at the University of Cambridge. The session is moderated by Caroline Faraj, Vice President and Editor-in-Chief of CNN Arabic.

Moreover, this year’s Congress discusses ‘The Dynamic Relationship Between Literature and Film Adaptation’ under its Conscious Conversations series, hosting Egyptian actor and director Karim Abdel Aziz; author and screenwriter Ahmed Mourad; and film director Marwan Hamed, in a session moderated by Eisa Al Marzooqi, news presenter and multimedia journalist at Sky News Arabia. Panellists will discuss cinema secrets, mutual influences of literature and cinema, ways to present cinematic works and their purposes, among other topics.

In a panel discussion titled ‘Evolving Consumer Tastes and Consumption in the Era of Multi-Platform Content Creation’, the Congress discusses radical shifts in content consumption patterns with the proliferation of digital platforms and consumers’ growing preference for these channels. The session also highlights patterns and specific characteristics of the content presented to consumers, underlining the strategies that content production companies use to balance meeting consumer aspirations and achieving the goals of various platforms. Featuring Mazen Hayek, consultant, media advisor, former Spokesman and Group Director of MBC Group; Maaz Sheikh, Co-Founder and CEO of STARZPLAY; and Ashley Rite, Vice President of Marketing and Growth at OSN, the session is moderated by Zeina Soufan, senior business news anchor at Asharq Business with Bloomberg.

Under the title ‘Creative Economy and Public and Private Collaboration’, the Congress examines the value and contribution of the creative economy to the local economy, discussing ways to enhance it through partnerships and cooperation across various sectors and geographic regions. The session hosts Rehana Mughal, Director of Creative Economy at the British Council and member of the Creative Industries Council, UK; Park Young Il, Director of Korea Creative Content Agency; and Muna Al Suwaidi, Programmes and Projects Advisor in the Culture and Creative Industries Sector at the UAE Ministry of Culture. Lynn Madi Business reporter, CNN business Arabic, is set to moderate the session.

As part of its efforts to highlight the evolving reality of technology and its impact, the Congress will be hosting a session titled ‘Cross-Border Storytelling through Game Adaptations’, to explore ways to transform stories from various cultures into interactive international games. The session brings together Fawzi Mesmar, Vice President of Global Creative at Ubisoft; Essam Bukhary, CEO of Manga Productions; and Lisa Hansen, CEO of Niko Partners. The session is moderated by Edward Nawotka, a publishing and content industry consultants, and Senior International and Bookselling Editor at Publishers Weekly.

The third International Congress of Arabic Publishing and Creative Industries offers a platform for extensive discussions on the capabilities, benefits, and role of generative artificial intelligence (AI) in the publishing industry, exploring its present and future prospects, as well as the extent of its impact on human relationships in general. To that end, a session titled ‘Beyond Bytes: Impact of Generative AI on Humanity’ will be held, featuring Nadim Sadek, Founder and CEO of Shimmer AI; Hoda Al Khzaimi, Director of the Centre of Cyber Security at New York University Abu Dhabi; and Preslav Nakov, Professor at the Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI). Aliah Yacoub, AI and Philosophy Researcher and Head of techQualia at Synapse Analytics, joins the session as moderator.

In line with its commitment to promote the culture of reading across all segments of the community, the Congress will host a discussion panel titled ‘New Readership: Fostering a Love for Reading in the Next Gen’. Participants include Luis Gonzalez, Director General of the GSR Foundation in Spain; Isobel Abulhoul, Co-founder of Magrudy’s Bookshop Chain, Founder, Advisor and Trustee of the Emirates Literature Foundation; and Mohamad Al Baghdadi, President and CEO of Al Manhal Arabic Electronic Information Platform. The panel of experts is set to discuss creative and interactive strategies to promote the love of reading in future generations, the importance of interactive content in Arabic, transformative methods to enhance children’s passion for literature, and the role of Arabic storytelling in building a distinctive cultural identity. The session is moderated by Georgia Tolley, Presenter and Radio Host at Dubai Eye 103.8FM.

Moreover, the Congress will conduct a wide range of workshops, panel discussions, and presentations involving experts from regional and international institutions, such as Google, Manga Productions, Roya Academy, Nielsen, Shorooq Partners, Sawt Platform, Majarra, and others. These sessions aim to enhance practical and technical skills for young talents, publishers, and specialists in media and content production; they cover a range of topics related to various skills from digital journalism to Arabic screenwriting, content creation for social media, and Extended Reality (XR) in storytelling, in addition to discussions about audio content, podcasts, home studios, anime, graphic novels, and visual novels.

The Congress PCI, in partnership with Frankfurt Book Fair, is presenting a training session for UAE and Arab publishers on pitching and negotiating publishing IP (intellectual property) rights. The session will be moderated by Claudia Kaiser, Vice President Business Development at Frankfurt Book Fair, featuring Sarika Lakhani, Managing Partner and Producer at ‘One Fine Day Films’ and Stu Levy, Founder and CEO at TOKYOPOP, the pioneer agency that brings Asian Pop Culture to Hollywood and beyond.

In collaboration with Bears Factor literary agency, the Congress is organising the Professional Exchange Sessions, bringing together Emirati and Arab publishers, literary agents, and international creatives from the United States, United Kingdom, Italy, France, Japan, China, Greece, and South Korea, among others. The sessions aim to strengthen efforts to transfer Arabic written works into creative formats and multiple languages, set robust foundations for collaboration, foster openness to global content production markets, enhance the exchange of intellectual property, provide a platform for participants to expand their networks and develop their projects, and ultimately expand the reach of Arabic creative content.

In another notable addition to its programme, this year’s Congress PCI is launching the Congress X for Youth competition, in collaboration with Unipreneur, to motivate and engage young people aged 15-35 to present their ideas and solutions for employing technology to enhance Arabic language learning and support creative talents in arts, media, and poetry.

Technology Innovation Institute (TII), a global research centre and applied research pillar of Abu Dhabi’s Advanced Technology Research Council, has launched NOOR, the world’s largest Arabic natural language processing (NLP) model to date. The project will be showcased within the Expo area alongside other participants demonstrating digital products that support the Arabic language.

The media coverage will be provided by several local and international media outlets, and in partnership

with CNN Business, the Arabic business news partner; and Sky News Arabia, the Arabic broadcast partner; offering diverse insights into the rich programme of the Congress.

For more information about activities and to register for the Congress, please visit the event’s official website

The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC) has announced that the third edition of the International Congress of Arabic Publishing and Creative Industries (Congress PCI) will take place on 28 April at Manarat Al Saadiyat in Abu Dhabi. The theme for this edition is 'Technological Transformations in the Publishing Industry and Drivers of Change.'

The Congress will kickstart ‘Abu Dhabi International Book Fair 2024’ and will feature speakers from as many as 50 countries, representing various cultural and creative fields. The landmark event will foster innovation and cross-sector collaboration within Arabic literature and creative works.

H.E. Mohamed Khalifa Al Mubarak, Chairman of the Department of Culture and Tourism - Abu Dhabi, said: “Congress PCI is part of our commitment to propel the publishing sector to even greater heights, in line with our mission to promote Arabic language as a priority and enable greater cross-cultural understanding. It presents a pivotal opportunity for experts from the publishing and creative sector to actively shape the future of this industry, while developing an innovation-centric infrastructure that empowers the next generation of creative minds. We are proud to be able to convene decision makers, speakers and delegates from around the globe to drive cross-disciplinary conversations in our constant effort to promote intercultural dialogue and collaboration. "

H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of the ALC, said: "The cultural and creative industries are key to the enrichment of nations and societies. Following the remarkable success of its two previous editions, the Congress has become an important platform for experts from Arab and international markets to connect, exchange experiences and knowledge, and learn about the latest practices in the field. For the creative industries in the Arab world to continue to thrive, we require innovative and ambitious minds, and this year we have a dedicated programme and several workshops to support young talent in these industries."

HE bin Tamim also highlighted that the Congress, with its carefully curated themes, creates common ground between the Arabic language and the cultural and creative industries, contributing positively to both.

A range of vital topics related to the publishing and creative industries will be discussed through various sessions. The keynote session ‘Foresight for Growth: Cultural and Creative Industries as a Driver for Economy’ will reveal how the cultural and creative sector adds resilience and growth capacity to the economy, within the context of real-life examples of initiatives led by Abu Dhabi. Featuring HE Mohammed Al Mubarak, Chairman of DCT Abu Dhabi and Mohamed El Erian, President of Queen’s College Cambridge, and moderated by Caroline Faraj, Vice-President and Editor-in-Chief of CNN Arabic, the discussion will explore the benefits of combining proven economic strategies with local cultural policies to drive sustainable development and economic diversification.

‘Creative Economy and Public and Private Collaboration’ will explore the value of the creator economy to the local economy, and how to boost the creator economy by leveraging new value-creation opportunities through cross-sector and geographic collaborations and partnerships.

‘Filmmaking Alchemy: The Dynamic Relationship Between Literature and Film Adaptations’ will shed light on the process a novel undergoes to become a film. This intricate process involves a myriad of talents, from the scriptwriters and directors to actors, cinematographers, sound teams, and music composers.

The ‘Cross-border Storytelling through Game Adaptations’ panel will explore how storytelling can be translated into cross-border interactive gaming experiences, exporting and sharing local cultures through compelling and stimulating games that reach global and universal audiences.

The panel ‘Evolving Consumer Tastes and Consumption in the Era of Multi-Platform Content Creation’ will discuss the disruptive shifts in the evolving landscape of content consumption and consumer preferences, questioning whether consumers are inclined to pay for broader access to various platforms or whether their primary demand is for increased content variety.

‘New Readership: Fostering a Love for Reading in the Next Gen’ will debate strategies for fostering a love for reading in Arabic in the next generation, and creative approaches to ignite passion for literature among young readers and enhance the cultural significance of Arabic storytelling.

Meanwhile, the ‘Beyond Bytes: Impact of Generative AI on Humanity’ panel will explore the intersection of technology and society, covering the latest technological advancements in publishing. It will examine how these advancements not only shape the creative processes and the future direction of the industry but also influence our collective experience, addressing the broader implications of technology on human connection and wellbeing.

The Congress will also hold a programme to support young talent through a variety of tracks, including exploring extended reality in storytelling and interactive content creation, as well as screenplay techniques for crafting impactful stories for the screen. It also encompasses social media promotion and strategies that empower authors and publishers to effectively market their works and engage with their audience. Additionally, it provides guidance on establishing a professional home studio through a set of guidelines for designing a sustainable and effective space for podcasting, content creation, and video production. Also, tracks focusing on comics and visual novels will explore the art of storytelling through visual media. The Congress also provides detailed publishing data that offers valuable insights into market trends and consumer preferences.

Featuring matchmaking sessions with literary and film agents, the Congress will support the sale and purchase of publishing and translation rights, while also providing opportunities to convert texts into visual creations. This initiative seeks to increase contractual agreements and cooperation between global publishing markets, allowing participants to expand their networks and negotiate rights with literary agents and publishers in other languages.

In partnership with the private sector, a hackathon will be held during the Congress, with participants competing on highlighting how technology and innovation can bolster Arabic learning and creative talent among UAE youth.

The event’s exhibition and demonstration theatre will host interactive experiences that showcase the latest advancements in publishing and content technologies. This area will be a hub for innovation, with partners showcasing their latest achievements and creative solutions. It will also provide opportunities for participants to engage with attendees, with live demonstrations that allow them to experience the potential of these innovations.

Not limited to the presentation of products, the theatre will also be a space for interaction, learning and discovery, inviting attendees to experience the latest technologies – from augmented and virtual reality applications in publishing, to cutting-edge software that has revolutionized content creation and dissemination. It also offers two-way interactions, where participants receive direct feedback from the audience and visitors gain valuable insight into the future of the publishing industry.

The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC), part of the Department of Culture and Tourism - Abu Dhabi (DCT Abu Dhabi), unveiled the activities planned for the 33rd Abu Dhabi International Book Fair (ADIBF 2024), which will be held from 29 April to 5 May at the Abu Dhabi National Exhibition Centre (ADNEC) under the slogan ‘Where the World’s Tales Unfold’.

The Fair will host 1,350 publishers from 90 countries, of which 140 publishers are participating for the first time. It will also feature 375 local exhibitors, including publishers, distributors, and government entities, who will be presenting their latest releases. ADIBF 2024 offers the public from various segments of the community a range of over 2,000 activities covering various cultural and knowledge fields.

The announcement was made during a press conference held on Thursday (18 April 2024) morning at the Louvre Abu Dhabi and attended by His Excellency Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of the ALC; Dr. Ahmed Bahi El Din, Chairman of the Egyptian General Book Authority; and H.E. Saeed Hamdan Al Tunaiji, ALC Executive Director and Director of the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair, along with prominent cultural and intellectual figures, and a gathering of local and international media personnel.

Speaking at the press conference, H.E. bin Tamim said: “This year’s edition of the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair is the most beautiful to date; it underlines the great success the event has had in achieving Abu Dhabi’s strategy, as the capital of the United Arab Emirates, to spearhead efforts to advance the presence of the Arabic language in creative and cultural industries, building on the momentum of its International Congress of Arabic Publishing and Creative Industries and its success in becoming the most influential Arab platform in this key sector.”

“Since its establishment by the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, Founding Father of the UAE, and the unwavering and generous support of His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE, the Fair has set the standards and traditions now followed by book fairs cross the Arab world,” H.E. bin Tamim added. “This includes selecting countries to be a Guest of Honour, where this year, we are proud to spotlight the Arab Republic of Egypt, as well as our Focus Personality programme and our comprehensive cultural and intellectual agenda featuring debates, professional programmes, popular international podcasts, and more.”

“This, in turn, expands the concept of a book fair, opening up new prospects for cultural and intellectual exchange,” H.E. continued. “The Abu Dhabi International Book Fair has successfully struck balance in its content, format, narrative, and objectives, presenting a premier cultural product that bridges the past and present, addresses the future, and contributes towards ensuring sustainability of knowledge, culture, and related industries.”

For his part, H.E. Saeed Hamdan Al Tunaiji presented highlights of the cultural events and knowledge activities planned for this year’s Fair. “The Abu Dhabi International Book Fair has become a staple on the cultural and creative calendar, awaited by all members of community, as well as a meeting point for creators from around the world looking to showcase their works and make their mark on the cultural scene,” he said. “In preparation for this year’s edition, we are gearing up to host 1,350 publishers from 90 countries, including 145 publishers participating in the Fair for the first time.”

“This year’s Fair will present a diverse cultural programme that includes sessions, seminars, and cultural and knowledge dialogues featuring a selection of authors, thinkers, and creatives from various fields,” H.E. Al Tunaiji added. “Moreover, Egypt will participate with a full schedule of events reflecting its cultural and intellectual role, alongside activities and programmes dedicated to the Focus Personality. Meanwhile, all participating countries will have their own showcases at their respective pavilions. The event presents the audience with cultural, professional, and creative arts programmes, as well as activities for children and youth, exhibitors, and partners, among other carefully curated events.”

The Abu Dhabi International Book Fair 2024 will be welcoming 12 countries participating for the first time, namely, Greece, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Pakistan, Cyprus, Mozambique, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Brazil.

The event offers the audience a diverse set of activities and cultural events, and this year’s edition will see a comprehensive digital payment system implemented for the first time in the Fair’s history. On another note, China will participate significantly this year with nine pavilions, making it the country’s largest presence at any book fair in the world. The official Chinese delegation will include 70 guests representing 80 Chinese publishing houses. The Chinese pavilion will offer 15 cultural, professional, and artistic events. Meanwhile, India will be participating with 23 publishing houses, along with a diverse cultural programme and activities focusing on various Indian dishes and cultures.

Guest of Honour

The exhibition this year hosts the Arab Republic of Egypt as Guest of Honour to engage the audience with a rich and diverse cultural programme reflecting its intellectual, knowledge, and civilisational history. Egypt’s selection for the programme reaffirms the deep-seated and historic relationship between the two countries, underlining the ALC’s commitment to enhancing cultural and intellectual collaboration, building on Egypt’s role as a beacon of knowledge, culture, and art that has influenced the cultures and knowledge of the masses with creative content across various fields.

Focus Personality

The ADIBF has chosen renowned Arab and international novelist Naguib Mahfouz as the Focus Personality of this year’s edition, in recognition of his great role and achievements that have long drawn attention to Arab culture and Arabic novels. This year’s Fair celebrates the first Arab author to win the Nobel Prize in Literature, making an undeniable impact with his literary works, most notably the ‘Cairo Trilogy’ and ‘Children of Gebelawi’, which were banned from publication in Egypt until recently, along with other influential works by the author.

Focus Personality Programme

ADIBF 2024 dedicates a comprehensive programme to its Focus Personality, offering a unique space to delve into the rich and creative worlds Naguib Mahfouz has created, exploring his origins, and analysing and appreciating his works. This includes in-depth and critical reading of these works, underlining their influence on various aspects of culture and other arts.

The program covers all the exhibition's events and activities to highlight the significant contributions of the writer and novelist Naguib Mahfouz, whose works are considered a mirror of life that had a profound impact on shaping the awareness of an entire generation through its achievements and projects, as well as its role in enhancing the status of the Arabic language. This provides a rare opportunity to identify with the author and explore his personality traits through modern audio-visual tools, seminars, and critical sessions, helping visitors paint an inspiring and comprehensive picture of the life and work of Naguib Mahfouz.

The Focus Personality programme takes place across all of the Fair’s events and activities, covering various aspects of Naguib Mahfouz’s life and career. A dedicated pavilion will be det up to shed light on Mahfouz’s most notable achievements, his life story, and his impact on literature and humanity, in addition to hosting daily sessions as part of the Cultural Programme.

With the Focus Personality programme, the Fair to shed light on the undeniable contributions of author and novelist Naguib Mahfouz, whose works are considered a mirror of life and have had a profound impact on shaping the awareness of an entire generation, in addition to its role in advancing the status of the Arabic language.

This year’s Focus Personality programme offers diverse themes under the Cultural Programme. It features a series of sessions hosting accomplished authors, thinkers, and artists from various parts of the Arab world to showcase Mahfouz’s timeless impact. Notable activities include a session titled ‘Naguib Mahfouz: Mirror of History and Society’, which discusses his works from a sociological and historical perspective; a session on ‘Beginnings and Endings’ that sheds light on Mahfouz’s early and later works; a session titled ‘The Harafish Group’, which hosts figures close to Naguib Mahfouz to discuss their memories with him; and a session on ‘Naguib Mahfouz and Criticism’, exploring his relationship with this art and the most important trends and currents that have addressed his literature.

The Cultural Programme includes a range of sessions, such as ‘Naguib Mahfouz: An Enduring Legacy’, ‘Naguib Mahfouz’s Descendants’, ‘Worlds of Naguib Mahfouz’, and ‘Naguib Mahfouz Novels in a New Format’, which introduces illustrated novels of the late author, to be published for the first time at the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair 2024, among other sessions.

Focus Personality Pavilion

The Book Fair offers visitors an immersive and exceptional experience to familiarise themselves with this year’s Focus Personality through a distinguished pavilion that will take the audience on a journey through Naguib Mahfouz’s historical works, his life, secrets, and much more. The pavilion’s a design was inspired by the Egyptian neighbourhood that the late writer was keen to embody in his immortal works.

Book of the World

In a new and notable step in its history, the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair is introducing the Book of the World programme this year, which sheds light on a book that has influenced the course of literature and culture around the world, and influenced various cultures throughout history. This year’s Book of the World is ‘Kalila wa Dimna’ by Abdullah Ibn al-Muqaffa, which has had an enduring impact throughout history and across cultures.

The dedicated programme for the Book of the World sheds light on the literary genre the book belongs to, which this year is the fable, bringing together renowned experts and specialists to explore it. This coincides with the art exhibition organised by the Louvre Abu Dhabi on the book, in collaboration with the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre, and the panel discussion on ‘Fables: Between the East and the West’, among other activities.

Rich and diverse cultural program

This year’s edition of the Fair offers visitors a rich and diverse Cultural Programme, featuring prominent intellectuals, experts, and specialists. Now in its third consecutive year, the event will host a series of debates modelled after the world-renowned Oxford style, making it the first in the Arab world to do so.

Abu Dhabi Podcasts

Following the success of the Podcast from Abu Dhabi programme’s episodes last year, the Fair has organised a second season this year, bringing together the most popular podcasts in the Arab world, including Thmanyah, El-Podcasters, El-Sharq Podcast, Bouh podcast, Micspod, and Arab Youth Podcast.

The Fair is hosting Thmanyah podcast from Saudi Arabia for the first time this year, featuring its CEO Abdulrahman Abumalih, who will engage the audience in a panel discussion highlighting Thmanyah’s experience and success. A mural titled ‘Thmanyah Writes, the World Reads’ will be displayed at one of the entrances to the Fair, depicting historical figures who influenced world culture. Moreover, the exhibition will include the Thmanyah platform, hosting a series of interviews and discussions with authors, moderated by Iman Asaad, head writer at Thmanyah and editor-in-chief of its newsletters.

Poetry Nights

Poetry lovers can look forward to daily encounters with prominent poets during the Poetry Nights events, where renowned Emirati poets will present special evenings celebrating poetry and its leading figures.

Professional Programme

The Abu Dhabi International Book Fair opens new horizons for publishing and creative industries this year, offering a Professional Programme designed to support Arab and international publishers. In this year’s edition, the Programme will highlight artificial intelligence and its impact on the publishing world and creative industries, bringing together a select group of experts and specialists to discuss the topic. The Programme focuses on sustainability, in line with the ‘Year of Sustainability’ initiative in the UAE, as well as knowledge exchange and copyright issues with international publishers. Experts are set to explore new opportunities in AI, digital technologies, creative industries, and more.

Furthermore, the Programme will offer a comprehensive range of keynote lectures, workshops focusing on AI in publishing, a Copyright Exchange Forum, introductory sessions, the Abu Dhabi Fellowship Programme (Abu Dhabi Connect), and the New Opportunities Centre. The Fair will also adopt a new initiative to support digital technologies and statistics in the Arab world, with a special focus on artificial intelligence, offering advanced workshops to build Arab publishers’ skills in this field.

Prominent experts and specialists in the field are set to take part in the Professional Programme, including Karine Pansa, President of the International Publishers Association (IPA); José Borghino, IPA Secretary General; Miles Stevens-Hoare, Managing Director at RBmedia, the world’s largest audio publisher; Michele Cobb, Executive Director of the Audio Publishers Association; and Mohamed Rashad, President of the Arab Publishers Association.

Arabic Content Forum for Children and Adolescents

This year’s edition of the Fair will be organising the first-ever Arabic Content Forum for Children and Adolescents, targeting writers, illustrators, publishers, and creators in this sector. Activities will be overseen by industry experts, who will address the most prominent topics and content that cater to the tastes and knowledge of younger generations.

Image as Language

For the first time this year, the Book Fair will provide photography enthusiasts a dedicated forum as part of the Arts Corner titled ‘Image as Language’, which will embody a dialogue between languages and alphabets, highlighting the history and evolution of photography in the UAE and the world. The Forum will shed light on the historical timeline of photography, from prehistoric cave drawings to alphabets and languages, all the way to sign language and software. It will also introduce the changes and developments that have occurred in the field of photography regarding film, lenses, and technologies, transitioning from analogue to digital, among other valuable aspects.

Art Corner

The ADIBF dedicates a corner for art lovers, characterised by its creative atmosphere, and welcoming the public to enjoy a unique and diverse artistic experience. The space provides artists with the opportunity to showcase their talents and artworks in aesthetic details, which serves to strengthen artistic culture in the local community and enhance interaction between artists and their audience.

Children and Youth Programmes

This year, the Fair dedicates a special corner and a comprehensive cultural programme for children and youth, offering a series of enriching activities that blend knowledge, science, practical application, and fun. These events are overseen by a group of experts and specialists from around the world.

Popular Book Markets: Al-Azbakiya Wall Book Market

For the first time in its history, the Book Fair also offers an exceptional experience for the public, allowing the audience to enjoy a unique experience at a popular book market named Al-Azbakiya Market after the old and prestigious Al-Azbakiya Wall Book Market in Egypt, providing an opportunity for visitors to explore its intellectual and knowledge treasures.

Offers and Discounts for All Members of the Community

This year’s Fair presents the public with a range of offers and discounts, offering visitors a free one-time visit to the Qasr Al Hosn and Louvre Abu Dhabi museums, in addition to exclusive discounts from audiobook publishing partners Iqraaly, Storytel, and Rufoof, along with discounts on book prices from all exhibitors of up to 25%.

Celebrating Creativity and its Pioneers

The ADIBF has always sought to be a platform for celebrating creative achievements and their creators. This year, the ALC will present three notable awards: the Sheikh Zayed Book Award, the Kanz Al Jeel Award, and the Golden Narrative (Sard Al Thahab) Award. The Centre will also be lending its support for the International Prize for Arabic Fiction and the Ibn Battuta Award for Travel Literature. Additionally, this year will celebrate the Asma Siddiq Al Mutawa First Novel Award and the World Organisation of Writers (WOW) award, which this year is granting the gold medal to poet Adel Khozam.

Cinema Corner

As part of its commitment to providing comprehensive content for all members of the community, the Book Fair is holding a dedicated Cinema Corner, where the Abu Dhabi Creative Media Authority will participate for the first time with a distinguished cinema programme, including film screenings and creative workshops for various age groups.

Lifestyle Corner

The Lifestyle Programme, held throughout the event, offers a diverse range of seminars, discussions, live shows, and interactive workshops covering various topics including health, fitness, nutrition, relaxation, and personal development, among other topics related to a healthy and balanced lifestyle.

Cuisines and Cultures

This year’s Fair allows visitors to explore the cultural diversity of cuisines from around the world, tasting a range of dishes and learning the stories behind each recipe. This corner offers a valuable and enjoyable educational opportunity to learn about different cultures through food and cooking.

Music is Culture

Celebrating the art of music, the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair 2024 is organising a comprehensive music programme that highlights diverse artistic experiences and distinctive rhythms. Audiences will experience magical moments with beautiful compositions presented by a group of talented artists and musicians, putting on performances that reflect the beauty of artistic differences between cultures and peoples. Moreover, audiences will have the opportunity to enjoy roaming musical performances from the Guest of Honour country, showcasing its diverse artistic cultures.

Under the patronage of His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE, the Sheikh Zayed Book Award (SZBA) organised by the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC), part of the Department of Culture and Tourism – Abu Dhabi (DCT Abu Dhabi), has announced winners of its 18th edition following a meeting of its Board of Trustees.

The meeting was chaired by His Excellency Sheikh Sultan bin Tahnoon Al Nahyan, Chairman of the SZBA Board of Trustees, and attended by Board Members H.E. Zaki Anwar Nusseibeh, Cultural Adviser to H.H. the President of the UAE; H.E. Mohamed Khalifa Al Mubarak, Chairman of DCT Abu Dhabi; H.E. Saood Al Hosani, Undersecretary of DCT Abu Dhabi; H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Secretary General of the SZBA and Chairman of ALC; H.E. Abdulla Majed Al Ali, Director-General of the National Library and Archives; and Abdulrahman Mohamed Alnaqbi, Literary Award Department Director at ALC.

H.E. Mohamed Khalifa Al Mubarak, Chairman of the Department of Culture and Tourism - Abu Dhabi, said: “Through ALC’s various initiatives, we seek to promote Arabic language proficiency and ensure greater cultural understanding. For 18 years, the Sheikh Zayed Book Award has played a pivotal role in supporting our efforts to enrich cultural and intellectual creativity worldwide while providing a platform for writers, translators, academics and organisations to reach global audiences. Through this platform, we are celebrating Arabic-speaking writers and authors who write about Arab culture and civilisation, collectively advancing our intellectual and cultural heritage.”

H.E. Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre, Secretary General of the SZBA, said: “Since its inception, the Sheikh Zayed Book Award has been an influential catalyst for the Arab cultural scene, actively contributing to the revitalisation of literary and poetic movements as well as translation efforts. We are proud to spotlight landmark projects and works from great minds around the world which have greatly impressed and inspired us. We congratulate this year’s winners and invite all creators to participate in the next edition of the Award, offering them the opportunity to make their contribution towards enriching the wider cultural scene.”

The winner of the Literature category of the Award is Egyptian writer Reem Bassiouney for her novel ‘Al Halwani...Thulathiyat al-Fatimiyeen’ (Al Halwani: The Fatimid Trilogy), published by Nahdet Misr Publishing, Printing and Distribution in 2022. Bassiouney is working on a project to write historical novels about Egypt in the Middle Ages, where she seeks to shed light on the Egyptian character with narratives that intertwine poetry, architecture, and mythology, while underscoring the human dimension. The author works to construct the narrative of historical and social development in Egypt in that era, using a narrative tone that aligns with the nature of that extended historical period and its intellectual and social dimensions.

Meanwhile, Dr. Houssem Eddine Chachia from Tunisia won the SZBA in the Young Author category for his work ‘Al Mashhad al-Moriski: Sardiyat al-Tard fi al-Fikr al-Espani’ (The Morisco Landscape Narratives of Expulsion in Modern Spanish Thought), issued by the Centre for Research and Knowledge Intercommunication in 2023. The work sheds light on the expulsion of the Moriscos who had remained in Spain, addressing its socio-cultural dimensions, and exploring the relation between memory and historic identity. The researcher makes a notable effort in investigating and documenting facts, while ensuring analytical and critical presentation. The study presents historical material documented in Spanish on the subject, offering an interdisciplinary historical study into civilisations and their relationships from a scientific perspective.

The Editing of Arabic Manuscripts category saw Dr. Mustafa Said from Egypt win for his study titled ‘Safinat al-Mulk wa-Nafisat al-Fulk (Shehab al-Din) al-Muwashah wa-Musiqa al-Maqam al-Natiqa bil-Arabiya bayn al-Tantheer wal-Maras’ (The Ship of Possession and the Precious Ship (Shehab al-Din) - Muwashah and Arabic-speaking Maqam Music between Theory and Practice), published by ElAin Publishing in 2023. The researcher conducted a comprehensive methodological study, showcasing his scientific acumen and enhanced prowess to analyse, understand, and critique. Dr. Said’s work makes it evident that he made a significant effort to organise his report and present information clearly to the reader. Remarkably this study stands out as the first comprehensive report from a scientific point of view and includes an in-depth study and statistical charts of melodies and connections.

Moreover, the winner of the Contribution to the Development of Nations category is Dr. Khalifa Alromaithi from the UAE, who won for his book: ‘Al-Asmaa’ al-Jughrafiya – Thakirat Ajyal’ (Geographical Names – Legacy of Generations), published by Austin Macauley Publishers in 2022. The book is characterised by its scientific spirit, accuracy of its language, and clarity of its style. It constitutes a study of geographical names in the United Arab Emirates, providing a reference for researchers into the subject. The author combines a historical and geographical approach, relying on data, numbers, maps, and historical tracing, making it a work of outstanding distinction and precision.

In the Translation category of the Award, the winner was Dr. Ahmed Somai from Tunisia, for his translation of ‘Al-Ilm al-Jadeed’ (La Scienza Nuova – The New Science), authored by Giambattista Vico, translated from Italian into Arabic, and published by Adab Publishing and Distribution in 2022. Dr. Somai stands out for skilfully transferring the terminology, structure, formulation, and context in which it was mentioned in Arabic. Furthermore, the translator included a notable introduction, as well as extensive annotations to help clarify the ideas and information presented in the text, making his translation a significant addition for the Arabic library.

Meanwhile, Frank Griffel won in the Arab Culture in Other Languages category for his book ‘The Formation of Post-Classical Philosophy in Islam’, published in English by Oxford University Press in 2021. The book sheds light on the key contributions of Islamic philosophy and its impact on subsequent developments in theology, science, and literature. It covers the developments that led to reshaping philosophical discourse in Islam during the 12th century. Griffel highlights figures who spoke in depth about philosophy in that era, delving into metaphysics, ethics, epistemology, and the intricate relationship between reason and revelation. One of the most innovative ideas expressed in the book is the combination of Greek philosophical ideas with Arab and Islamic schools of thought; it explains how scholars like Al-Farabi and Ibn Sina attempted to reconcile these diverse traditions. The book also reviews the figures and movements that influenced Islamic philosophy, making it a valuable contribution to understanding post-classical eras in Islamic philosophy.

The Publishing and Technology category saw China-based Bayt Elhekma for Creative Industries win the Award. The group aims to establish a cultural bridge that tells China’s story and history, promoting cross-cultural dialogue between China and the Arab world. Since its establishment, the group has translated and published more than 300 books and publications, in addition to a vast number of documents and newspapers. These efforts have allowed Bayt Elhekma for Creative Industries to compile a large database of Chinese and Arabic linguistic inventory, which can be employed to serve cultural endeavours on both the Chinese and Arab sides.

The group is an integrated cultural project operating in Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, Morocco, and China. In just a few years, it has managed to build Arab, regional, and international knowledge bridges through its branches and projects that focus on connecting the Middle East with the Far East and establishing rooted knowledge through publishing, translation, education, visual media, cultural industries, and trade. The group includes a comprehensive children's library comprising books and stories for children and adolescents, ranging from illustrated stories to skill development books, educational resources, and motivational educational novels for adolescents.

Submissions for the 18th edition were the highest in the Award’s history, with a total of 4,240 nominations received, marking a 35% increase over last year’s 3,151 submissions. Additionally, the number of participating countries grew to 74, including 19 Arab nations and 55 countries from around the world.

The winner of the Cultural Personality of the Year award will be announced in the upcoming few weeks. The winners will be honoured at a ceremony organised by the ALC during the 33rd Abu Dhabi International Book Fair, which is held annually at the Abu Dhabi National Exhibition Centre.

The Sheikh Zayed Book Award is organised annually by the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre to honour the pioneering cultural legacy of the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, Founding Father of the UAE. The Award honours intellectuals, creators, publishers, and youth for their contributions to the fields of development, authorship, and translation that have had a clear impact on cultural, literary, and social life, based on scientific and objective criteria.

The Sheikh Zayed Book Award (SZBA), organised by the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC), has unveiled the shortlists for its 18th edition, showcasing an array of remarkable literary works from around the world. The Award revealed shortlisted nominations across its Literature, Young Author, Translation, Contribution to the Development of Nations, Arab Culture in Other Languages, Editing of Arabic Manuscripts and Publishing and Technology categories.

Shortlists were announced following a meeting of the SZBA Scientific Committee, chaired by His Excellency Dr. Ali bin Tamim, Secretary-General of the SZBA and Chairman of ALC, and attended by Committee members,: H.E. Saeed Hamdan Al Tunaiji, Executive Director of the ALC; Prof. Dr. Khalil Al Sheikh from Jordan; Dr. Badria Al Bishr from Saudi Arabia; Mr. Juergen Boos from Germany; Prof. Floréal Sanagustin from France; Dr. Nadia El Cheikh from Lebanon; Dr. Amany Fouad Gadallah from Egypt; and Mr. Mustafa Al-Slaiman from Jordan/Germany. The meeting was also attended by Abdulrahman Mohamed Alnaqbi, Literary Awards Department Director at the ALC.

H.E. Dr. bin Tamim applauded the Committee members for their significant contributions and role in promoting the Award, noting that their extensive experience and knowledge add tremendous value to the Award and raise its global profile. H.E. bin Tamim asserted that Committee members’ recommendations and systematic approach has contributed to the development of the Award’s standards throughout its past editions, reflecting and reinforcing Abu Dhabi’s cultural and literary prominence.

The shortlist for the Literature category consisted of three works, namely ‘Fursa L-Gharam Akheer’ (A Chance for One Last Love) by Hassan Dawood from Lebanon, published by Hachette Antoine/Nofal in 2022; ‘Al Halwani...Thulathiyat al-Fatimiyeen’ (Al Halwani: The Fatimid Trilogy) by Reem Bassiouney from Egypt, published by Nahdet Misr Publishing, Printing and Distribution in 2022; and ‘Nasheej al-Duduk’ (The Duduk’s Whimper) by Jalal Barjas from Jordan, published by the Arab Institute for Research and Publishing in 2023.

The shortlist for the Young Author category features three works: ‘Na’eesh li-Nahki: Balaghat al-Takhyeel fi Kalila wa Dimna’ (Living to Narrate: The Eloquent Imagination in Kalīla wa-Dimna) by Mustapha Rajouane from Morocco, issued by Kunouz Al-Ma’refa Publishing and Distribution House in 2023; ‘Simya’iyat al-Qira’a: Dirasa fi Shurooh Diwan al-Mutanabbi fi al-Qarn al-Sabe’ Hijri’ (The Semiotics of Reading: a Study of the Seventh Hijri Century Interpretation of the Al-Mutanabbi's Diwan), by Dr. Alawi Ahmed Al Malgami from Yemen, issued by Kunouz Al-Ma’refa Publishing and Distribution House in 2023; and ‘Al Mashhad al-Moriski: Sardiyat al-Tard fi al-Fikr al-Espani’ (The Morisco Landscape Narratives of Expulsion in Modern Spanish Thought), by Dr. Houssem Eddine Chachia from Tunisia, issued by the Centre for Research and Knowledge Intercommunication in 2023.

The shortlist for the Translation category consisted of ‘Al-Aalam Iradatan wa-Tamathulan’ (Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung – The World: Will and Imagination), authored by Arthur Schopenhauer, translated from German to Arabic by Said Tawfik from Egypt, published by ‏Dar Al Kitab Al Jadeed, in 2023; ‘Limatha Naqraa’ al-Adab al-Classiki?’ (Perché Leggere I Classici – Why Do We Read Classic Literature?), authored by Italo Calvino, translated from Italian to Arabic by Dalal Naserallah from Kuwait, published by Al Mada for Media, Culture, and Arts, in 2021; and ‘Al-Ilm al-Jadeed’ (La Scienza Nuova – The New Science), authored by Giambattista Vico, translated from Italian to Arabic by Dr. Ahmed Somai from Tunisia, published by Adab Publishing and Distribution, in 2022.

Three works made it to the shortlist for the Contribution to the Development of Nations category including: ‘Al-Asmaa’ al-Jughrafiya – Thakirat Ajyal’ (Geographical Names – Legacy of Generations), by Dr. Khalifa Alromaithi from the UAE, published by Austin Macauley Publishers, in 2022; ‘Sikkat al-Tramway: Tareeq al-Hadatha Marra bi-Dimashq’ (Tramway Railway: The Path of Modernity Passed Through Damascus), by Sami Marwan Moubayed from Syria/UK, published by Riad El Rayyes Books, in 2022; and ‘Al-Arabiya Lughat al-Aayn: Dirasa Dalaliya Uurfaniya’ (The Arabic Language: A Study of Cognitive Semantics), by Dr. Fatima Bakouch from Tunisia, published by Masciliana Editions, in 2023.

Furthermore, the shortlist for the Arab Culture in Other Languages category consisted of five works including: ‘The Formation of Post-Classical Philosophy in Islam’ by Frank Griffel, published in English by Oxford University Press in 2021; ‘On Earth or in Poems: The Many Lives of al-Andalus’ by Eric Calderwood, published in English by Harvard University Press in 2023; ‘Warum es kein islamisches Mittelalter gab’ (Why There Was No Islamic Middle Ages) by Thomas Bauer, published in German by C.H. Beck Verlag in 2018; ‘La letteratura d’adab’ (The Literature of Adab) by Antonella Ghersetti, published in Italian by Istituto per l'Oriente Carlo Nallino in 2021; and ‘Louis Massignon et la mystique musulmane: Analyse d’une contribution à l’islamologie’ (Louis Massignon and Islamic mysticism: An analysis of a contribution to Islamology) by Florence Ollivry, published in French by Brill Publishing in 2023.

The shortlist for the Editing of Arabic Manuscripts category consisted of ‘Sharh Diwan Thi-Al Rimma li Abi al-Hasan Ali bin Mohammed bin Ali bin Kharouf Al-Eshbili Al-Andalusi’ (Interpretation of the Diwan of Thi Al Rimma by Abi Al Hassan Ali bin Mohammed bin Ali bin Kharouf Al-Eshbili Al-Andalusi) by Awad bin Mohammed Salem Al Daheel Al Awlaqi from Saudi Arabia, published by Dar Al Nawader - Al Madina Al Munawwarah Literary Publishing Club in 2019; ‘Al-Fawa’id al-Sunniya fi al-Rihla al-Madaniya wal-Rumiya, Tathkirat al-Nahrawali’ (Sunni Benefits in the Madani and Roman Journey ‘Nahrawali Diary’) by Al-Mahdi Eid Al-Rawadieh from Jordan, published by The Orient-Institut Beirut in 2022; ‘Safinat al-Mulk wa-Nafisat al-Fulk (Shehab al-Din) al-Muwashah wa-Musiqa al-Maqam al-Natiqa bil-Arabiya bayn al-Tantheer wal-Maras’ (The Ship of Possession and the Precious Ship (Shehab al-Din) - Muwashah and Arabic-speaking Maqam Music between Theory and Practice) by Dr. Mustafa Said from Egypt, published by ElAin Publishing in 2023.

Finally, the Publishing and Technology category shortlist includes The International Youth Library (Internationale Jugendbibliothek) in Munich – Germany; Spanish National Research Council (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas) – Spain; Bayt Elhekma for Creative Industries – China; and Finjan Podcast – Saudi Arabia.

The Sheikh Zayed Book Award decided to withhold the Award from “Children’s Literature” and “Art & Literary Criticism” from this cycle. This year’s edition of the Sheikh Zayed Book Award has seen the largest participation in its history, with a total of 4,240 submissions from 74 countries, including 19 Arab nations and 55 from around the world. This remarkable surge highlights the Award's profound significance and unwavering credibility in the realms of culture, literature, and academia, solidifying its position as a respected entity both regionally and internationally. As a beacon of literary and scholarly excellence, the Award continues to draw submissions from diverse corners of the world, a testament to its universal appeal and enduring impact.

The Award honours creative minds and thinkers in the fields of literature, arts, and humanities in Arabic, as well as other languages, in recognition of distinguished achievements. The SZBA provides new opportunities for Arabic-speaking writers and recognises authors who write about Arab culture and civilisation in English, French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Russian.

The Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC) successfully wrapped up the international conference "On the Path of Mutual Understanding: Arabic-Russian and Russian-Arabic Literary Translation", on December 21 and 22 in Moscow, Russia. Held in conjunction with UNESCO's World Arabic Language Day and part of the “Arabian Days” Festival this initiative was in alignment with ALC's mission of promoting and advancing the Arabic language and aimed to showcase the language's artistic, cultural, and societal applications, while also illuminating the contributions of its leading intellectuals and creative minds.

Organised in collaboration with the Institute of Oriental Studies at the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), the National Research University Higher School of Economics (HSE), and the Embassy of the United Arab Emirates in Russia, and brought together renowned Russian and Arab writers, poets, translators, and linguists and promoted cross-cultural dialogue and understanding through the exchange heritage, culture, and literature.

The Conference addressed topics such as the fantasy genre in Russian and Arabic literature, the art of the novel and acculturation between Russian and Arabic, possibility of artificial intelligence replacing the art of translation, and ways to contribute to the development of the art of translating Arabic literature into Russian and vice versa.

His Excellency Dr Ali bin Tamim, Chairman of the ALC, said: “Preserving and promoting the Arabic language celebrates our cultural identity. The Conference has also helped strengthen our cultural ties with one of Moscow’s oldest literary and cultural hubs, fostering dialogue, introducing the timeless works of our language through translations, and exploring the literary gems of other nations.”

The agenda for the Conference included four panel discussions, as well as musical performances and activities featuring renowned literary figures, academics, and experts in literature and language. The opening session brought together HE Dr Ali bin Tamim, Dr Felix Azhimov, Dean of the Faculty of Humanities - HSE University, Dr Vitaly Naumkin, Head of the Institute of Oriental Studies - RAS, Head of the Main Department of the Institute of Oriental Studies at the National University of Research - Graduate School of Economics, and full member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, as well as Mohammad Rashid Al Mansoori, Head of the Political Department at the Embassy of the United Arab Emirates in the Russian Federation.

The first panel discussion, ‘Fantasy in Russian and Arabic Literature’, featured HE Dr Ali bin Tamim, Ekaterina Koloskova, Lecturer at the Institute of Cultures and the Ancient Classical Era at the National University of Research - Graduate School of Economics, and an Arabic Literature Translator, and Ekaterina Zvontsova, writer, editor, novelist, and instructor of literary skills. Moderated by Vasily Kuznetsov, Vice President of the Institute of Oriental Studies - Russian Academy of Sciences and Head of the Center for Arab and Islamic Studies at the Institute of Oriental Studies, the session discussed the role of fantasy literature in Russian and Arab cultures, outlining key defining features of the genre.

The second session, ‘The Art of the Novel and Cultural Exchange between Russian and Arabic’, featured Shamil Idiatullin, journalist, writer, and winner of the “Big Book” literary prize, along with Dr Christina Osipova, Assistant Professor in the Department of Arabic Philology at the Institute of Asian and African Studies at Moscow State University. Moderated by Rami El Kaliubi, an Egyptian-Russian journalist, translator, and visiting lecturer at the School of Orientalism at HSE, the session discussed the main tenets of the novel in modern Russian and Arab literature, the reasons driving the public’s renewed interest in this literary genre, and the common elements and differences between modern novels in both cultures.

The third session, ‘Will Artificial Intelligence Replace the Art of Translation?’, featured Dr Alexander Kostyrkin, Head Researcher in the Department of Asian and African Languages at the Institute of Oriental Studies - Russian Acedemy of Sciences, Ksenia Burjskaya, author, poet, journalist, and AI specialised trainer, and Dr Abdallah Abushmaes, Acting Language Research and Studies Unit Head at the ALC. Moderated by Dr Berlant Qabeel, Programmes Section Head at the ALC, the session posed a number of questions, most notably: What does the art of translation consist of? Can AI replace humans in translation? And what are the specific features for using AI in literary translation from Russian to Arabic and vice-versa? The discussion also explored how auto translation technologies can bring people and cultures together, and the extent to which this can threaten cultural identity.

The fourth and final session titled ‘How Can We Contribute to the Development of the Art of Arabic-Russian and Russian-Arabic Literary Translation?’, delved into the traditions of literary translation from Arabic to Russian and vice-versa over many centuries, exploring means to generate more interest in Russian literature. Speakers were Elena Gimon, visiting lecturer at the School of Oriental Studies at the National University of Research - HSE University and organiser of the Russian-Arabic Literary Translation Competition, and Leonid Kogan, Deputy Director of the Institute of Cultures and the Ancient Classical Era at the National University of Research - HSE University, and Head Researcher at the Center for Arab and Islamic Studies at the Institute of Oriental Studies - Russian Academy of Sciences, as well as Hind Khlaifat, Journalist and Director at “Deraya”.

The discussion was moderated by Vitaly Naumkin, Head of the Institute of Oriental Studies - Russian Academy of Sciences, Head of the Main Department of the Institute of Oriental Studies at the National University of Research - Graduate School of Economics, and Full Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences. The participants explored the current state of literary translation between the two languages, the potential to increase readers’ interest in Russian literature in the Arab world and Arabic literature in Russia, and the role of writers, translators, publishers, and experts in oriental studies in enhancing this interest.

The conference agenda also included the announcement of a new translation competition organised by the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC) in collaboration with the Institute of Oriental Studies at the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), as well as a musical performance titled ‘Spirit of the Emirates’, which presented renditions of poems by the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, Founding Father of the UAE, performed by Sherine Tohamy, oud soloist and professor at Bait Al Oud in Egypt, along with musician and violinist Ali Dridi and percussionist Hussain Al Hammadi.

Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Center (ALC) concluded the inaugural edition of the ‘Arabian Days’ festival, which was held between December 15 and 18, 2023, at Manart Al Saadiyat, Abu Dhabi, under the theme ‘Arabic - The Language of Poetry and the Arts’.

This first-of-its-kind festival, which coincided with the UNESCO’s celebration for the World Arabic Language Day, featured the participation of numerous experts in Arabic language. This included Arab authors, poets, and researchers, as well as a group of talented individuals from the UAE and the Arab world, all of whom presented discussion sessions, theatrical performances, musical events, and poetry.

The ‘Arabian Days’ festival entailed a number of cultural events, including the ‘Antarah Exhibition... the Poet of Love and Horsemanship’, which emphasised the life of Antarah ibn Shaddad al-'Absi, the renowned Arab poet, and his poetry. In addition, numerous interactive sessions were also held, including ‘Wonders of the Arabic Language’, ‘Roots of Words’, ‘Platform of Audio Recordings’. Furthermore, interactive drama performances were also organised from a week before to the event for visitors to numerous public places in Abu Dhabi, including the Emirate’s shopping centres. As part of this, performers and actors portrayed historical personalities in poetry and creativity from ancient times through drama perf